2 KINGS 1-2 
===========

Ahaziah consults the priests of Baal-zebub to see if he will recover
from a fall, but Elijah prophesies that he will die. Elisha succeeds
Elijah as prophet. Elijah is taken to heaven in a fiery chariot. Elisha
is confirmed as Elijah\'s successor by the miracles he performs.

THE FINAL DAYS OF ELIJAH\'S MINISTRY (1:1-2:1 1) 
------------------------------------------------

### Elijah and Ahaziah (1:1-18) 

#### The fall (1:1-2): 

Ahaziah suffers a serious fall and sends messengers to the temple of
Baalzebub to ask if he will recover.

#### The foretelling (1:3-4): 

Elijah prophesies that Ahaziah will die from his injuries because he
consulted Baal.

#### The fury (1:5-9, 11): 

An angry Ahaziah sends soldiers to arrest Elijah.

#### The fire (1:10, 12): 

Elijah calls down fire from heaven, which consumes the first two
companies of soldiers.

#### The favor (1:13-15): 

The captain of the third company begs for mercy. After the angel of the
Lord tells Elijah to go with the captain, he does so.

#### The fulfillment (1:16-18): 

Elijah repeats his prophecy to King Ahaziah himself, and the prophecy is
fulfilled.

### Elijah and Elisha (2:1-11): 

Elijah and Elisha make a final journey together just before Elijah is
taken up into heaven.

#### The route (2:1-6): 

Traveling from Gilgal to Bethel to Jericho to the Jordan River, Elisha
is repeatedly reminded that his master is going to be taken away. Elisha
repeatedly affirms his loyalty to Elijah.

#### The river (2:7-8): 

At the Jordan River, Elijah performs his final miracle by parting its
waters.

#### The request (2:9): 

Elisha asks to become Elijah\'s \"rightful successor.\"

#### The requirement (2:10): 

Elijah tells Elisha that he will receive his request if he witnesses
Elijah\'s departure.

#### The removal (2:11): 

As Elisha watches, a chariot of fire appears, and Elijah is carried into
heaven by a whirlwind!

THE FIRST DAYS OF ELISHA\'S MINISTRY (2:12-25) 
----------------------------------------------

### He parts the Jordan (2:12-14): 

Elisha takes up Elijah\'s cloak and parts the Jordan by striking its
waters with it.

### He pacifies some prophets (2:15-18): 

Reluctantly Elisha permits 50 prophets to search for Elijah.

They are unsuccessful.

### He purifies some water (2:19-22): 

Elisha throws salt into a polluted spring at Jericho and makes it
wholesome.

### He punishes some mocking youths (2:23-25) 

#### The mocking (2:23): As Elisha heads to Bethel, some young boys ridicule his bald head. 

#### The mauling (2:24-25): Elisha curses the young boys, and two bears come out of the woods and maul 42 of them! 

2 KINGS 3-4 
===========

Joram succeeds Ahaziah and goes to war with Moab. The Lord provides
water for Israel and Judah and uses it to lure the Moabites to their
destruction. Elisha provides oil for a widow, raises a dead child,
purifies a pot of stew, and feeds 100 men with only a small amount of
food.

ELISHA AND KING JORAM (3:1-14) 
------------------------------

### The incompetent king (3:1-9) 

#### Joram\'s idolatry (3:1-3): 

Ahab\'s son Joram (sometimes called Jehoram) becomes Israel\'s ninth
ruler. He practices idolatry, although he removes a sacred pillar of
Baal.

#### Joram\'s intent (3:4-8): 

King Joram persuades King Jehoshaphat of Judah to help him fight the
Moabites, who have rebelled against him.

#### Joram\'s ineptness (3:9): 

After a seven-day roundabout march, Joram\'s army runs out of water in
the wilderness of Edom.

### The indignant prophet (3:10-27) 

#### The request (3:10-12): 

King Jehoshaphat asks King Joram to seek instruction from a prophet of
the Lord.

#### The rebuke (3:13-14): 

The two kings ask Elisha what they should do, but he tells the king of
Israel that he wants no part of him. After King Joram pleads with him,
Elisha agrees to help them for the sake of King Jehoshaphat.

#### The reply (3:15-19): 

While a harp is played, Elisha receives a message from the Lord that the
dry valley before them will be filled with water and that they will
defeat the Moabites.

#### The red water (3:20-23): 

The water appears, just as the Lord promised. The morning sun causes it
to look like blood to the Moabites, and they think the armies have
killed each other.

#### The routing (3:24-27) 

##### Moab\'s defeat (3:24-25): 

When the Moabite soldiers arrive to collect the plunder, Israel\'s
soldiers rush out and destroy them.

##### Moab\'s desperation (3:26-27): 

The king of Moab realizes that his forces are being overwhelmed; he
offers his oldest son as a burnt sacrifice, and the Israelite army
returns home.

ELISHA AND A POOR WIDOW (4:1-7) 
-------------------------------

### The widow\'s crisis (4:1-2): 

A widow of one of Elisha\'s fellow prophets is threatened with the
enslavement of her two sons because of unpaid debts. All she has is a
flask of olive oil.

### Elisha\'s command (4:3-7): 

Elisha instructs the widow to borrow as many containers as possible. The
olive oil fills all the containers. Elisha then tells her to sell the
oil, pay her debts, and support her family with the rest of the money.

ELISHA AND THE WOMAN FROM SHUNEM (4:8-37) 
-----------------------------------------

### Her hospitality (4:8-17) 

#### The room (4:8-10): 

A wealthy woman from Shunem provides a special room for Elisha whenever
he comes through the area.

#### The reward (4:11-17): 

Elisha wishes to reward this woman for her hospitality, so he promises
her that she will have a son in one year. This all takes place just as
Elisha says.

### Her heartache (4:18-28) 

#### The source of her tears (4:18-21):

Years later, the woman\'s son becomes ill and dies.

#### The solution for her tears (4:22-31): 

The woman finds Elisha and tells him about her son. Elisha sends Gehazi
ahead to lay his staff on the child\'s face, but nothing happens.

### Her happiness (4:32-37): 

Elisha restores the boy to life and presents him to his mother, who is
overwhelmed with gratitude.

ELISHA AND THE PROPHETS (4:38-44): 
----------------------------------

Elisha returns to Gilgal, and a famine comes upon the land.

### The poisonous food (4:38-41): 

One of Elisha\'s prophets makes stew for the others, but he unknowingly
uses poisonous gourds. Elisha purifies it by throwing some flour in the
stew.

### The plentiful food (4:42-44): 

Elisha instructs a man to give a sack of grain and 20 loaves of barley
bread to 100 prophets. The man does so, and there is more than enough
food for everyone.

2 KINGS 5 
=========

Naaman, the commander of the Aramean army, seeks out Elisha in order to
be healed of leprosy. Naaman is healed when he obeys Elisha\'s
instructions, but Elisha\'s servant Gehazi is struck with leprosy for
his greed.

THE CLEANSING OF LEPROSY (5:1-19) 
---------------------------------

### Naaman\'s disease (5:1): 

Naaman is a highly successful commander of the Aramean army, but he
suffers from leprosy.

### Naaman\'s determination (5:2-5) 

#### The little girl (5:2-3): 

Naaman\'s wife\'s maid, a young Israelite captive, tells her mistress
about Elisha\'s ability to heal Naaman\'s leprosy.

#### The large gift (5:4-5): 

Believing the young girl, Naaman travels to meet Elisha, carrying with
him considerable amounts of gold and silver.

### Naaman\'s detainment (5:6-8) 

#### The request by the king of Aram (5:6): 

The king of Aram addresses a letter to Israel\'s king, requesting that
Naaman be healed.

#### The response by the king of Israel (5:7): 

The king of Israel tears his clothes in frustration, concluding that the
request is an excuse for Aram to attack Israel when it is not granted.

#### The reassurance by the man of God (5:8): 

Elisha tells the king of Israel to send Naaman to him; Naaman will learn
that there is a true prophet in Israel.

### Naaman\'s displeasure (5:9-13) 

#### The announcement (5:9-10): 

Naaman arrives at Elisha\'s house, but Elisha simply sends him a message
telling him to wash himself seven times in the Jordan River.

#### The anger (5:11-12): 

Naaman is furious, for he expects Elisha to come out and heal him
personally.

#### The advice (5:13): 

Naaman\'s officers convince him to obey the prophet.

### Naaman\'s deliverance (5:14): 

Naaman washes in the Jordan. He is healed of his leprosy, just as Elisha
had said.

### Naaman\'s dedication (5:15-19) 

#### His presents (5:15-16): 

Naaman attempts to give gifts to Elisha, but Elisha refuses them.

#### His promises (5:17-19): 

Naaman vows that he will worship the Lord from now on.

THE CURSE OF LEPROSY (5:20-27) 
------------------------------

### Gehazi\'s lust (5:20): 

Elisha\'s servant, Gehazi, determines to receive a gift from Naaman,
even though Elisha refused them.

### Gehazi\'s lie (5:21-24): 

Gehazi tells Naaman that Elisha has changed his mind and would like some
gifts. Gehazi returns and hides the gifts.

### Gehazi\'s leprosy (5:25-27): 

Elisha tells Gehazi that he knows what happened, and he curses Gehazi
and his family with leprosy.

2 KINGS 6-7 
===========

Elisha causes an ax head to float. Elisha blinds the Aramean army and
leads them to Samaria. Later, Ben-hadad besieges Samaria and cuts off
its food supply. The Lord causes the Aramean army to flee, and four
lepers inform the rest of the people about the abandoned supplies.

THE BORROWED AX (6:1-7): 
------------------------

Elisha\'s prophets begin building a new meeting place near the Jordan
River.

### The ax head falls (6:4-5): 

As one of the prophets is chopping with a borrowed ax, the ax head falls
into the Jordan River.

### The ax head floats (6:6-7): 

Elisha throws a stick into the river where the ax head fell, and the
head floats to the surface for the prophet to retrieve.

THE BLINDED ARMY (6:8-23) 
-------------------------

### The background (6:8-17) 

#### The revelations to Elisha (6:8-10): 

On several occasions Elisha can foresee the king of Aram\'s plans to
attack Israel. The prophet warns the king of Israel about each threat.

#### The retaliation against Elisha (6:11-14): 

The king of Aram learns that it is Elisha who is forewarning the king of
Israel, so he sends his army of soldiers to arrest Elisha.

#### The reassurance by Elisha (6:15-17) 

##### The panic (6:15): 

When Elisha\'s servant sees the Aramean army surrounding them, he
becomes afraid.

##### The promise (6:16): 

Elisha reassures his servant that their army is bigger than the Aramean
army!

##### The prayer (6:17): 

Elisha asks the Lord to open his servant\'s eyes.

##### The protection (6:17): 

The servant sees a massive army of fiery horses and chariots surrounding
them.

### The blinding (6:18-23) 

#### The miracle (6:18): 

As the Aramean soldiers advance, Elisha prays for the Lord to blind
them, and he does!

#### The march (6:19-20): 

Elisha leads the Arameans to the city of Samaria.

#### The mercy (6:21-23): 

When the king of Israel asks if he should kill the Arameans, Elisha
tells him no. He tells the king to feed them and send them home, and the
king does so.

THE BESIEGED CITY (6:24-7:20): 
------------------------------

Sometime later, the Arameans besiege Samaria.

### The plight of the people (6:24-29): 

Conditions inside Samaria become so terrible that people resort to
cannibalism!

### The prejudice of the king (6:30-33): 

The king of Israel blames Elisha and the Lord for this terrible
situation.

### The prophecy of Elisha (7:1-2): 

Elisha makes a twofold prophecy:

#### There will be abundant food for the famine-stricken city within 24 hours (7:1). 

#### The king\'s officer who doubted Elisha\'s first prophecy will not be able to eat any of the food (7:2). 

### The panic of the Arameans (7:3-11): 

Four Israelite men with leprosy enter the abandoned camp of the
Arameans.

#### The desperation (7:3-4): 

Since they are starving anyway, four Israelite men with leprosy decide
to throw themselves upon the mercy of the Arameans outside Samaria.

#### The discovery (7:5-8): 

When the men go to the Arameans, they find an abandoned camp still
stocked with food, for the Lord had caused the Arameans to flee at the
sound of a great army approaching.

#### The duty (7:9-11): 

The lepers conclude that it is their moral obligation to share the news
with Samaria\'s starving citizens, so they return to the city and tell
the gatekeepers.

### The plunder by the people (7:12-16): 

After the king of Israel sends out scouts and confirms the discovery,
the people rush out and collect the abundant plunder of food and silver.
This fulfills Elisha\'s first prophecy.

### The passing of the officer (7:17-20): 

The king assigns the officer who scoffed at Elisha\'s words to control
the traffic at the gate, but he is trampled to death in the rush,
fulfilling Elisha\'s second prophecy.

2 KINGS 8 
=========

The woman from Shunem tells the king of Israel about Elisha\'s deeds.
Elisha tells Hazael that he will become the next king of Aram, so Hazael
kills Ben-hadad and becomes king. Jehoram succeeds Jehoshaphat as king
of Judah, and then Ahaziah succeeds Jehoram.

THE REMINISCING ABOUT ELISHA (8:1-6): 
-------------------------------------

Gehazi and the woman from Shunem tell the king of Israel of Elisha\'s
deeds.

### The relocation (8:1-2): 

Elisha had warned the woman from Shunem about a seven-year famine, so
she and her family had lived in Philistia.

### The return (8:3): 

When the famine is over, the woman returns to Israel and approaches the
king to get her house and land back.

### The restoration (8:4-6): 

As the woman enters the palace, Gehazi is telling the king about the
time Elisha raised the woman\'s son from the dead. When Gehazi points
out the woman, the king directs his officials to restore everything she
had lost.

THE REGICIDE OF BEN-HADAD (8:7-15): 
-----------------------------------

Ben-Hadad, king of Aram, is sick and sends his officer Hazael to ask
Elisha if he will recover.

### The fatal sickness of Ben-hadad (8:7-10): 

Elisha tells Hazael that his master will die.

### The fearful reign of Hazael (8:11-15): 

Elisha also tells Hazael that he will become king and commit many
terrible acts against the people of Israel. The next day Hazael kills
Ben-hadad and becomes king of Aram.

THE RULERS OF JUDAH (8:16-29) 
-----------------------------

### Jehoram, Judah\'s fifth ruler (8:16-24) 

#### The elevation to power (8:16-17): 

Jehoram succeeds Jehoshaphat as king of Judah.

#### The evil wife (8:18): 

Jehoram is as evil as King Ahab, because he marries Athaliah, one of
Ahab\'s daughters.

#### The everlasting covenant (8:19): 

Despite Jehoram\'s wickedness, the Lord continues to honor his covenant
regarding David\'s dynasty.

#### The Edomite war (8:20-22): 

Jehoram is unable to put down the Edomite revolt against his kingdom.

#### The end of Jehoram (8:23-24): 

Jehoram\'s death is recorded.

### Ahaziah, Judah\'s sixth ruler (8:25-29): Ahaziah succeeds his father Jehoram as king of Judah. 

#### The wicked mother (8:26-27): 

Ahaziah\'s mother is the cruel and corrupt Athaliah, a granddaughter of
King Omri.

#### The wounded monarch (8:28-29): 

King Ahaziah joins King Joram in a war against King Hazael of Aram. When
Joram is wounded in battle, Ahaziah visits him.

2 KINGS 9-10 
============

Jehu is anointed king of Israel and kills King Joram and King Ahaziah.
Jezebel is thrown to her death and eaten by dogs. Jehu kills all of
Ahab\'s relatives and many from Ahaziah\'s family as well. Jehu kills
many priests of Baal. Jehu dies after reigning 28 years.

I.THE ANOINTING OF JEHU (9:1-13) 
--------------------------------

### The prophet (9:1-6): Elisha instructs one of his young prophets to go to Ramoth-gilead and anoint Jehu as Israel\'s tenth ruler. 

### The prophecies (9:7-10): After the young prophet anoints Jehu, he foretells of the destruction of Ahab\'s family. 

### The proclamation (9:11-13): When Jehu tells his fellow officers what happened, they blow a trumpet and acknowledge him as king. 

THE ATTACKS BY JEHU (9:14-10:29): 
---------------------------------

Jehu kills Joram, Ahaziah, and their families, making him one of the
bloodiest men in the Bible.

### He kills King Joram of Israel (9:14-26) 

#### Where Joram is killed (9:14-20): 

King Joram is in Jezreel, recovering from a wound suffered in battle.

#### How Joram is killed (9:21-26): 

Jehu shoots King Joram between the shoulders, and the arrow pierces his
heart. King Joram dies in his chariot.

### He kills King Ahaziah of Judah (9:27-29): 

When King Ahaziah sees what happened to King Joram, he flees in his
chariot. But he is fatally shot in his chariot too.

### He kills Jezebel (9:30-37) 

#### Her sarcasm (9:30-33): 

When Jehu enters the gate of the palace at Jezreel, Jezebel calls him a
murderer. Jehu tells her eunuchs to throw her from the window, which
they do.

#### Her skull (9:34-37): 

Wild dogs eat Jezebel\'s body, leaving only her skull, feet, and hands!

### He kills Ahab\'s family (10:1-11, 15-17) 

#### The dare made by Jehu (10:1-3): 

Jehu forewarns the people of Samaria that he will attack whichever of
Ahab\'s sons is declared king.

#### The decapitation performed by the people (10:4-8): 

The frightened people ask what Jehu wants them to do. Jehu instructs
them to bring him the heads of Ahab\'s 70 sons, which they do.

#### The destruction unleashed on the rest (10:9-11, 15-17): 

Jehu destroys the rest of Ahab\'s family and associates.

### He kills Ahaziah\'s family (10:12-14): 

As Jehu travels to Samaria to finish killing Ahab\'s relatives, he meets
King Ahaziah\'s relatives and kills them all.

### He kills the priests of Baal (10:18-28) 

#### The deception (10:18-24):

Jehu pretends that he wants to worship Baal and assembles all the
priests of Baal in their own temple.

#### The destruction (10:25-28): 

Jehu orders all the priests to be killed, and he destroys the temple of
Baal.

THE ASSURANCE TO JEHU (10:29-30): 
---------------------------------

Despite his failure to remove the gold calves at Bethel and Dan, the
Lord commends Jehu for destroying Ahab\'s family. The Lord promises that
Jehu\'s descendants will be kings to the fourth generation.

THE APOSTASY OF JEHU (10:31 -36) 
--------------------------------

### His paganism (10:31): 

Jehu continues to practice idolatry and disobey the Law of the Lord.

### His punishment (10:32-33): 

The Lord allows King Hazael to conquer land east of the Jordan River
that belonged to Israel\'s 2 ½ tribes.

### His passing (10:34-36): 

Jehu dies after reigning for 28 years.

2 KINGS 11-12 
=============

Athaliah becomes queen of Judah and destroys all the royal family except
Joash, who is hidden in the Temple. A priest arranges for Athaliah\'s
death and declares Joash king. Joash repairs the Temple but uses its
treasures to pay off King Hazael so he wouldn\'t attack Jerusalem. His
own officers assassinate him.

ATHALIAH, JUDAH\'S SEVENTH RULER (11:1-18) 
------------------------------------------

### The evil queen (11:1-3) 

#### The ones she murders (11:1): 

Athaliah tries to kill the entire royal family to secure her reign over
Judah.

#### The one she misses (11:2-3): 

Joash, infant grandson of Athaliah, is hidden in the Temple and raised
there.

### The executed queen (11:4-18) 

#### The priest (11:4): 

After six years, Jehoiada the priest prepares to remove Athaliah as
queen.

#### The plan (11:5-16) 

##### Regarding Joash (11:5-12): 

Jehoiada presents him to the people and proclaims him Judah\'s king.

##### Regarding Athaliah (11:13-16): 

She is taken out of the Temple and killed.

#### The pact (11:17-18): 

Following the queen\'s death, Jehoiada makes covenants between the Lord,
the king, and the people, and they destroy the idols of Baal.

JOASH, JUDAH\'S EIGHTH RULER (11:19-12:21) 
------------------------------------------

### The ascension of Joash (11:19-21): 

Seven-year-old Joash is led into the palace and takes his place as the
new king of Judah.

### The activities of Joash (12:1-18) 

#### Joash and the Temple money (12:1-16) 

##### The command (12:1-5): 

Joash instructs the priests to begin much-needed repairs on the Temple.

##### The concern (12:6-8): 

Years later, the king is upset when he learns that the priests still
have not repaired the Temple.

##### The chest (12:9-16): 

To finance the Temple repairs, Jehoiada bores a hole in the lid of a
large chest and sets it beside the Temple entrance to receive money for
repairs.

#### Joash and the tribute money (12:17-18): 

When King Hazael of Aram attacks Jerusalem, King Joash pays him off with
money and valuables taken from the Temple and the palace. C. The
assassination of Joash (12:19-21): King Joash is assassinated by his own
officers.

2 KINGS 13-14 
=============

The reigns of Jehoahaz and Jehoash are recorded. Elisha makes a final
prophecy of victory over Aram. Elisha dies, and a man is revived from
the dead when his body touches Elisha\'s bones. Jehoash defeats Aram
three times. The reigns of Amaziah and Jeroboam II are recorded.

THE REIGNS OF FOUR MONARCHS (13:1-19, 22-25; 14:1-29) 
-----------------------------------------------------

### Jehoahaz, Israel\'s eleventh ruler (13:1-9) 

#### The rebellion (13:1-2, 6): 

Jehoahaz follows the wicked example of Jeroboam, Israel\'s first king.

#### The retribution (13:3-9): 

Because of the Israelites\' sin, the Lord allows the Arameans to defeat
them. Jehoahaz prays for the Lord\'s help, so the Lord sends a
deliverer. But the people continue to sin, and the Arameans reduce
Jehoahaz\'s forces to a fraction of their original size.

### Jehoash, Israel\'s twelfth ruler (13:10-19, 22-25) 

#### The iniquities against the Lord (13:10-13): 

Like many before him, Jehoash worships idols.

> After he dies, Jeroboam II becomes king.

#### The instructions from the prophet (13:14-25) 

##### The occasion for the event (13:14-15): 

The king visits Elisha when the prophet is very ill.

##### The order to the king (13:16-18): 

Elisha prophesies victory for Israel as the king shoots an arrow out the
window. Elisha orders the king to strike the floor repeatedly with the
other arrows.

##### The objection by Elisha (13:19): 

Elisha is angry that Jehoash struck the floor only three times instead
of five or six times. Now the king will have only three victories over
Aram instead of total victory.

##### The ownership of the towns (13:22-25): 

Because of his mercy and his covenant with Abraham, the Lord keeps the
people of Israel from being completely destroyed, and he enables Jehoash
to recover some towns from Aram.

### Amaziah, Judah\'s ninth ruler (14:1-22) 

#### His activities (14:1-14) 

##### On the home front (14:1-6) 

###### He pleases the Lord (14:1-4). 

###### He punishes the guilty (14:5): 

Amaziah executes those who assassinated his father, Joash.

###### He protects the innocent (14:6): 

Obeying the Law of Moses, the king did not kill the children of his
father\'s assassins.

##### On the battle front (14:7-14) 

###### The war he wins (14:7): 

Amaziah completely defeats the Edomites.

###### The war he loses (14:8-14): 

Amaziah foolishly provokes a war with Israel. He is captured and forced
to pay heavy tribute to his victors.

#### His assassination (14:15-22): 

Like his father, Joash, Amaziah is assassinated by his own people. He is
succeeded by his son Uzziah (also known as Azariah).

### Jeroboam II, Israel\'s thirteenth ruler (14:23-29) 

#### Jeroboam\'s sinfulness (14:23-24): 

Jeroboam II follows the wicked example of his predecessor, Jeroboam I.

#### The Lord\'s sovereignty (14:25-29): 

The Lord is moved with compassion for his suffering people and uses this
wicked ruler to accomplish his purposes. Jeroboam II recovers much of
Israel\'s land that had been occupied by its enemies, just as Jonah the
prophet predicted.

THE REVIVAL OF ONE MAN (13:20-21): 
----------------------------------

Sometime after Elisha\'s death, a corpse comes back to life when his
body is thrown on top of Elisha\'s bones!

2 KINGS 15-16 
=============

The reigns of Uzziah, Zechariah, Shallum, Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah,
Jotham, and Ahaz are recorded.

THE GODLY KINGS (15:1-7, 32-38) 
-------------------------------

### Uzziah, Judah\'s tenth ruler (15:1-7) 

#### His longevity (15:1-3): 

For the most part, Uzziah does what is pleasing to the Lord and rules
Judah for 52 years.

#### His leprosy (15:4-7): 

Uzziah allows idolatry to continue in Judah, and the Lord strikes him
with leprosy. Uzziah\'s son governs Judah until his father\'s death.

### Jotham, Judah\'s eleventh ruler (15:32-38) 

#### His behavior (15:32-35): 

Jotham follows the example of his father by pleasing the Lord while
still allowing idolatry in Judah.

#### His building project (15:35-38): 

Jotham rebuilds the upper gate of the Temple.

THE GODLESS KINGS (15:8-31; 16:1-20) 
------------------------------------

### Zechariah, Israel\'s fourteenth ruler (15:8-12) 

#### The abomination of Zechariah (15:8-9): 

Like his father, Zechariah worships idols.

#### The assassination of Zechariah (15:10-12): 

After a reign of only six months, Zechariah is assassinated.

##### Who (15:10-11): 

Shallum murders him and becomes the next king.

##### Why (15:12): 

The Lord allows this to happen in order to fulfill the words of Jehu the
prophet (see 2 Kings 10:30).

### Shallum, Israel\'s fifteenth ruler (15:13-15): 

After a reign of only one month, he is murdered by Menahem.

### Menahem, Israel\'s sixteenth ruler (15:16-22) 

#### His brutality (15:16): 

When the citizens of a town refuse to surrender to him, Menahem kills
all the people and rips open the pregnant women.

#### His blasphemy (15:17-18): 

Menahem does what is evil in the Lord\'s sight, practicing idolatry like
Jeroboam.

#### His bribery (15:19-22): 

When the Assyrians invade Israel, Menahem pays them a massive bribe to
secure his reign over Israel.

### Pekahiah, Israel\'s seventeenth ruler (15:23-26) 

#### The idolatry (15:23-24): 

Pekahiah does what is evil in the Lord\'s sight, practicing idolatry
like those before him.

#### The insurrection (15:25-26): 

After a reign of two years, Pekahiah is assassinated by his military
general, Pekah.

### Pekah, Israel\'s eighteenth ruler (15:27-31) 

#### The corruption (15:27-28): 

Pekah worships idols, just as Jeroboam did.

#### The captivity (15:29): 

The Assyrians conquer several regions of Israel and take the people back
to Assyria as captives.

#### The conspiracy (15:30-31): 

Hoshea plots against the king and kills him.

### Ahaz, Judah\'s twelfth ruler (16:1-20) 

#### His wickedness (16:1-4, 10-20): 

Ahaz sacrifices upon various pagan altars and even offers his own son as
a sacrifice. He replaces the old bronze altar, built by Solomon, with
one modeled after a pagan altar in Damascus. Ahaz rearranges some of the
Temple furnishings.

#### His war (16:5-9): 

Ahaz enters into an alliance with the king of Assyria to stave off an
attack by Israel and Aram.

2 KINGS 17 
==========

The reign of Hoshea and the fall of Samaria are recorded. The reasons
for the Assyrian invasion are given. Foreigners resettle in Israel and
combine pagan worship with the worship of the Lord.

THE REVOLT BY HOSHEA (17:1-6): 
------------------------------

Hoshea becomes Israel\'s nineteenth ruler.

### The abomination by Hoshea (17:1-2): 

Hoshea does what is evil in the Lord\'s sight.

### The annual tribute to Assyria (17:3): 

King Shalmaneser of Assyria defeats Hoshea and forces Israel to pay a
heavy annual tribute.

### The attempt at freedom (17:4): 

Hoshea conspires with the king of Egypt to break free of Assyria\'s
power.

### The annihilation of Samaria (17:4-6): 

The king of Assyria hears of Hoshea\'s plan, so he arrests Hoshea,
destroys Samaria, and exiles the people to Assyria.

THE REASON FOR THE ASSYRIAN CAPTIVITY (17:7-23): 
------------------------------------------------

Despite the Lord\'s many warnings through his prophets, Israel chose to
follow the example of Jeroboam, the first king, and practice idolatry.

THE RESETTLING FOLLOWING THE ASSYRIAN CAPTIVITY (17:24-41) 
----------------------------------------------------------

### The people (17:24): 

People from other conquered nations resettle in Samaria and the
surrounding towns.

### The problem (17:25-26): 

Because these foreigners do not know how to worship the Lord properly,
lions come and kill some of them.

### The priests (17:27-28): 

One of the deported Jewish priests is sent back to Israel to teach the
people how to worship the Lord.

### The paganism (17:29-41): 

The people combine the worship of the Lord with the worship of their
false gods. \[This is probably the religion of the Samaritan woman at
the well with whom Jesus spoke (see John 4:1-42).\]

2 KINGS 18-19 
=============

Hezekiah becomes king. Assyria invades Judah, and Sennacherib calls for
the people of Jerusalem to surrender. Hezekiah seeks the Lord\'s help,
and the prophet Isaiah sends a message to him from the Lord. The angel
of the Lord kills 185,000 Assyrian soldiers, and Sennacherib is killed
by his own men.

THE PLEASING DEEDS OF HEZEKIAH (18:1-8): 
----------------------------------------

Hezekiah becomes Judah\'s thirteenth ruler.

### His destruction of idolatry (18:1-4): 

Hezekiah launches a campaign against idolatry in Israel, destroying the
pagan shrines and idols.

### His dependence on the Lord (18:5-8): 

Hezekiah trusts in the Lord and obeys him. As a result, the Lord gives
him military success. Hezekiah revolts against the king of Assyria by
refusing to pay him tribute.

THE PROVOCATION BY THE ASSYRIANS (18:9-18) 
------------------------------------------

### The review (18:9-12): 

The capture of Samaria by the Assyrians is reviewed.

### The retaliation (18:13): 

The Assyrians invade Judah to punish Hezekiah for his revolt.

### The regret (18:14-18): 

Hezekiah asks the Assyrian king to forgive him concerning the revolt.
Hezekiah strips the Temple of silver and gold to pay off the Assyrians.

THE PROPAGANDA OF SENNACHERIB (18:19-19:4, 8-13) 
------------------------------------------------

### The forewarning (18:19-35): 

The Assyrians surround Jerusalem and taunt its citizens, promising them
swift and severe punishment unless they surrender.

### The fear (18:36-19:4): 

Hezekiah\'s officials report this to the king, and he becomes afraid. He
dresses in sackcloth and prays in the Temple. He also asks Isaiah to
pray for Judah.

### The final warning (19:8-13): 

Sennacherib receives word that he must put down a rebellion in Ethiopa.
Before he goes, he warns Hezekiah of the fate of all the nations that
have opposed him and says that the same will happen to Judah.

THE PRAYER OF THE KING (19:14-19): 
----------------------------------

In desperation, Hezekiah lays Sennacherib\'s letter before the Lord and
pleads with him to save Jerusalem.

THE PROMISES OF THE LORD (19:5-7, 20-34) 
----------------------------------------

### First reassurance (19:5-7): 

The Lord informs Hezekiah through the prophet Isaiah that Jerusalem will
be saved and that the Assyrian king will return home and be killed.

### Second reassurance (19:20-34): 

Isaiah sends Hezekiah a message from the Lord regarding Assyria\'s
judgment.

#### Sennacherib\'s pride (19:20-27): 

The Lord rebukes Sennacherib for his arrogance and for refusing to
acknowledge that it was the Lord who granted him his accomplishments.

#### Sennacherib\'s punishment (19:28): 

The Lord promises to bind Sennacherib and send him away from Israel.

#### Israel\'s protection (19:29-34): 

The Lord promises to protect Israel, so that in three years they will be
able to plant crops and harvest them.

THE PASSING OF EVENTS (19:35-37) 
--------------------------------

### The army (19:35): 

One night the angel of the Lord kills 185,000 Assyrian troops.

### The assassination (19:36-37): 

Upon his return to Nineveh, Sennacherib is murdered by his own sons.

2 KINGS 20-21 
=============

The Lord extends Hezekiah\'s life by 15 years. Hezekiah shows the
treasures of the Temple to the Babylonian envoys. The reigns of Manasseh
and Amon are recorded.

THE END OF HEZEKIAH\'S REIGN (20:1-21): 
---------------------------------------

This chapter describes the final years of Hezekiah\'s life.

### The sickness (20:1): 

Hezekiah becomes very ill; Isaiah tells him that the Lord has said he
will die.

### The supplication (20:2-3): 

Hezekiah cries out for the Lord to help him.

### The salvation (20:4-7) 

#### The Lord\'s message (20:4-6): 

Isaiah tells Hezekiah that the Lord will heal him and he will live 15
more years.

#### The Lord\'s medicine (20:7):

Isaiah instructs Hezekiah\'s servants to make an ointment from figs and
spread it over Hezekiah\'s boil. They do, and Hezekiah recovers.

### The sign (20:8-11): 

As a sign that Hezekiah will recover, Isaiah tells the king that the
shadow on the sundial will move forward or backward, whichever way
Hezekiah requests. The king asks that it move backward, which it does.

### The stupidity (20:12-21) 

#### The flaunting by Hezekiah (20:12-13): 

When the king of Babylon sends envoys to visit Hezekiah while he is
recovering, Hezekiah welcomes them and shows them all the kingdom\'s
wealth.

#### The faulting of Hezekiah (20:14-21): 

Isaiah rebukes Hezekiah for doing this and says that someday the
Babylonian army will attack Jerusalem to steal Judah\'s great treasures.

THE EVIL OF MANASSEH\'S AND AMON\'S REIGNS (21:1-26) 
----------------------------------------------------

### Manasseh, Judah\'s fourteenth ruler (21:1-17) 

#### His perversions against God (21:1-9, 16) 

##### Manasseh the blasphemer (21:1-5, 7-9): 

Manasseh practices idolatry and imitates the evil ways of the people
whom the Lord drove out of the Promised Land. He sets up pagan altars
and idols in the Temple.

##### Manasseh the butcher (21:6, 16): 

Manasseh even sacrifices his own son and slaughters his innocent
subjects.

#### His punishment from God (21:10-15, 17): 

The Lord promises to bring disaster on Jerusalem, just as he did to
Samaria.

### Amon, Judah\'s fifteenth ruler (21:18-26) 

#### The apostasy by Amon (21:18-22): 

Amon practices the same idolatry that his father, Manasseh, practiced.

#### The assassination of Amon (21:23-26): 

Amon is killed by his own servants, who, in turn, are killed by the
people.

2 KINGS 22-24 
=============

Josiah becomes king and orders repairs made to the Temple. The Book of
the Law is discovered. Josiah institutes religious reforms, tearing down
pagan shrines and reinstating the Passover celebration. Josiah is killed
in battle. The reigns of Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah
are recorded.

THE GODLY KING (22:1-23:30): 
----------------------------

Josiah becomes Judah\'s sixteenth ruler.

### Doing God\'s work (22:1-7): 

Josiah begins his reign by ordering repairs made to the Temple.

### Discovering God\'s Word (22:8-20; 23:1-30): 

The Book of the Law (or Book of the Covenant) is found, and it launches
a religious revival throughout Judah.

#### The priest (22:8-13): 

HiIkiah the high priest finds the Book of the Law in the Temple during
the repair work. Josiah tells the priests to find out what will happen
because of the people\'s disobedience to the law.

#### The prophecy (22:14-20): 

The priests consult the prophet Huldah, and she tells them about the
punishment that the Lord will bring.

##### Regarding Judah (22:15-17): 

The city and its people will be destroyed because of their many sins.

##### Regarding Josiah (22:18-20): 

Because of Josiah\'s repentance, the Lord promises to hold off the
destruction until after Josiah\'s death.

#### The pledge (23:1-3): 

Josiah assembles all the leaders of Judah at the Temple and reads the
Book of the Covenant. The king renews the covenant. He and the people
pledge to obey the terms of the covenant.

#### The purge (23:4-20, 24-25):

Josiah launches a campaign to eradicate idolatry from Judah.

##### He removes all the pagan objects from the Temple (23:4, 6-7). 

##### He removes the pagan priests and reinstalls the Lord\'s priests (23:5, 8-9). 

##### He destroys the pagan shrines and altars (23:10-15, 19-20, 24). 

##### He burns the bones of some dead pagan prophets, fulfilling a prophecy made during Jeroboam\'s reign (23:16-18; see 1 Kings 13:1-2). 

#### The Passover (23:21-23): 

Josiah calls for all the people to celebrate the Passover once again.

#### The punishment (23:25-30): 

Despite Josiah\'s reforms, the Lord carries out his sentence of
destruction on the people of Judah, though it happens many years after
Josiah\'s death (see 2 Kings 25:1-21). Josiah is killed in battle by
Pharaoh Neco of Egypt.

THE GODLESS KINGS (23:31-24:20) 
-------------------------------

### Jehoahaz, Judah\'s seventeenth ruler (23:31-34) 

#### His perversion (23:31-32): 

Jehoahaz does what is evil in the Lord\'s sight.

#### His prison sentence (23:33-34): 

Pharaoh Neco imprisons Jehoahaz, forces Judah to pay a large tribute,
and installs Eliakim (whose name is changed to Jehoiakim) to reign in
his place.

### Jehoiakim, Judah\'s eighteenth ruler (23:35-24:7) 

#### The raising of Neco\'s tribute (23:35-37): 

Jehoiakim collects an income tax to pay the tribute that Pharaoh Neco
imposes on him.

#### The reign of Nebuchadnezzar (24:1, 7): 

King Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon attacks Judah and imposes another tribute
on the people for three years.

#### The raiders from nearby lands (24:2-4): 

The Lord continues to punish Judah by allowing Babylonian, Aramean,
Moabite, and Ammonite raiders to harass the people.

#### The rest of Jehoiakim\'s reign (24:5-6):

Jehoiakim dies and his son Jehoiachin becomes the next king.

### Jehoiachin, Judah\'s nineteenth ruler (24:8-17): 

During Jehoiachin\'s reign, Nebuchadnezzar besieges Jerusalem and takes
captive all those with any skill or status-about 10,000 people in all.
Jehoiachin is also taken captive, and his uncle is installed as king.

### Zedekiah, Judah\'s twentieth ruler (24:18-20): 

Zedekiah does evil in the Lord\'s sight, so the Lord exiles the people
of Jerusalem and Judah. Zedekiah rebels against Nebuchadnezzar.

2 KINGS 25 
==========

Nebuchadnezzar overtakes Jerusalem a final time, and the Temple is
destroyed. Gedaliah is appointed governor of Judah but is assassinated.
A new king ascends to the Babylonian throne, and he shows favor to
Jehoiachin, releasing him from prison and granting him living expenses.

THE FALL OF JERUSALEM (25:1-21): 
--------------------------------

When Zedekiah rebels against Nebuchadnezzar, the Babylonians besiege
Jerusalem again.

### The defeat (25:1-7): 

After two years of siege, Jerusalem suffers severe famine. So Zedekiah
and his men flee the city by night, but they are captured by the
Babylonians. Zedekiah is forced to watch as his sons are killed. Then
his eyes are gouged out, and he is taken to Babylon.

### The destruction (25:8-10, 13-17): 

The city\'s walls are pulled down, and the Temple and all the important
buildings are destroyed. The Temple\'s valuable furnishings are taken to
Babylon.

### The deportation (25:11-12, 18-21): 

The leading citizens are exiled to Babylon, and those found hiding in
the city are killed.

THE FATE OF GEDALIAH (25:22-26) 
-------------------------------

### The appointment of Gedaliah (25:22-24): 

Nebuchadnezzar appoints Gedaliah as governor over Judah; he promises
peace if the inhabitants submit to the king of Babylon.

### The assassination of Gedaliah (25:25-26): 

Gedaliah is murdered by a member of the royal family.

> Many people flee to Egypt, fearing how the king of Babylon will
> retaliate.

THE FAVOR TOWARD JEHOIACHIN (25:27-30): 
---------------------------------------

After many years, Evil-Merodach ascends to the Babylonian throne and
shows favor toward Jehoiachin. He releases him from prison, supplies him
with clothing and food, and provides him with living expenses.
