This part covers the section of Deuteronomy consisting mostly of four
sermons that review and summarize the history and laws of Israel. Moses
delivers these sermons to the Israelites as they are about to enter the
Promised Land.

DEUTERONOMY 1-4 
===============

Moses delivers his first sermon to the Israelites.

AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL AT MOUNT SINAI (Deut. 11 -18) 
---------------------------------------------------

### The area promised by the Lord (Deut. 1:7-8): 

The Lord gives the Israelites all the land from the Negev to the
Euphrates River.

### The administrators picked by Moses (Deut. 1:9-18): 

Moses recounts the selection of the 70 elders (see Num. 11:14-17).

AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL AT KADESH-BARNEA (Deut. 1:19-46) 
------------------------------------------------------

### The route of the spies (Deut. 1:19-25): See Num. 13:1-17. 

### The rebellion of the crowd (Deut. 1:26-33): See Num. 14:1-4. 

### The retribution by the Lord (Deut. 1:34-46): See Num. 14:26-38. 

AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL EN ROUTE TO THE JORDAN RIVER (Deut.2:1-3:29): 
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Moses recounts how the Lord finally said to him \"You have been
wandering around in this hill country long enough; turn northward.\"

### The three friends (peaceful nations) (Deut. 2:4-23): 

Moses reviews how the Lord commanded the Israelites not to seize the
land of three nations.

#### Seir (Deut. 2:4-8): 

\"Don\'t bother them, for I have given them all the hill country around
Mount Seir as their property, and I will not give you any of their
land.\"

#### Moab (Deut. 2:9-15): 

\"Do not bother the Moabites, the descendants of Lot, or start a war
with them. I have given them Ar as their property, and I will not give
you any of their land.\"

#### Ammon (Deut. 2:16-23): 

\"Do not bother the Ammonites, the descendants of Lot, or start a war
with them. I have given the land of Ammon to them as their property, and
I will not give you any of their land.\"

### The two foes (enemy nations) (Deut. 2:24-3:11): 

Moses reviews how the Lord commanded the Israelites to attack two other
nations.

#### King Sihon of Heshbon (Deut. 2:24-37): 

Moses reviews Israel\'s victory over this king.

#### King Og of Bashan (Deut. 3:1-11): 

Moses reviews Israel\'s victory over this huge giant, whose iron bed
measured 13 feet long by 6 feet wide!

### The two favors (Deut. 3:12-29) 

#### The request of the 2 Â½ tribes (Deut. 3:12-22): 

Moses reviews how he granted the request of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh to
settle on the eastern side of the Jordan River.

#### The request of Moses (Deut. 3:23-29): 

Moses reviews how the Lord refused his request that he be allowed to
enter the Promised Land.

### AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL\'S RELATIONSHIP WITH THE LORD (Deut. 4:1-49) 

#### The God of Israel (Deut. 4:1-19, 24, 31-40): 

Israel is commanded to worship God and God alone, to keep his laws, and
to be careful not to add to or subtract from his laws.

#### The Israel of God (Deut. 4:20-23, 25-30): 

Israel is commanded to remember that they belong to the Lord and that
they will be punished if they stray from him.

#### The Law of Moses (Deut. 4:41-49): 

Some final instructions are given by Moses, and the law that follows in
the next several chapters is introduced.

DEUTERONOMY 5-26 
================

Moses delivers his second sermon to the Israelites.

CONCERNING THE MORAL LAW: 
-------------------------

Moses reviews and expands upon the laws the Lord had given the
Israelites regarding morality.

### The covenant (Deut. 5:1-5): 

Moses reviews the covenant God made with Israel at Mount Sinai (see Ex.
19:5).

### The commandments (Deut. 5:6-22; 6:1-9, 20-25) 

#### The record (Deut. 5:6-22; 6:1-5): 

Moses reviews the Ten Commandments as originally given in Exodus 20 with
the addition of the \"Hear, 0 Israel! The LORD is our God, the LORD
alone. And you must love the LORD your God with all your heart, all your
soul, and all your strength.\"

#### The responsibilities (Deut. 6:6-9, 20-25): 

Moses tells the people that they must teach the commandments to their
children and remind them of their rescue from Egypt.

### The chosen (nation) (Deut. 7:6-11; 9:1-6; 10:12-22): 

Moses reminds the Israelites that God\'s love for them is based on his
grace, not their goodness. How is Israel to respond? \"What does the
LORD your God require of you? He requires you to fear him, to live
according to his will, to love and worship him with all your heart and
soul, and to obey the LORD\'s commands and laws that I am giving you
today for your own good.\"

### The circumstances (Deut. 5:23-33; 9:7-10:5) 

#### The reception of the law (Deut. 5:23-33): 

Moses recounts how the people responded to the Lord\'s awesome presence
on Mount Sinai (see Ex. 19:9-25).

#### The rejection of the law (Deut. 9:7-29): 

Moses recounts several occasions when the people rebelled against the
Lord\'s commands.

##### At Mount Sinai (Deut. 9:7-21): 

Here Israel worshiped the golden calf, which led Moses to smash the two
stone tablets containing the Ten Commandments (see Ex. 32).

##### In the wilderness (Deut. 9:22-29): 

At Taberah, Massah, and Kibroth-hattaavah, Israel refused to enter the
Promised Land (see Num. 13-14).

#### The replacement of the law (Deut. 10:1-5): 

Moses recounts how two new tablets containing the Ten Commandments were
made to replace the tablets that were dashed to the ground.

### The choices (Deut. 10:6-9): 

Moses recounts the selection of Eleazar (Aaron\'s son) as high priest
(see Num. 20:23-29) and of the tribe of Levi as ministers before the
Lord (see Ex. 32:25-29).

### The confidence (Deut. 7:12-24; 11:22-32): 

Moses assures the Israelites that obedience to the Lord\'s commands
brings blessing, wealth, health, and victory over enemies.

### The caution (Deut. 6:10-19; 7:1-5, 25-26; 8:11-20; 11:16-17): 

Moses warns the Israelites to fear the Lord, to worship and obey him
only, and to remember his faithfulness. He also directs them to destroy
their enemies and the pagan idols of the land.

### The country (Deut. 8:7-10; 11:8-15): 

Moses tells the people that Canaan is a land of abundant water and lush
lands of wheat, barley, vines, figs, pomegranates, olives, and honey.
The land also contains rich stores of iron and copper.

### The compassion (Deut. 8:1-6; 10:10-11; 11:1-7): 

Moses recalls the Lord\'s great faithfulness and compassion toward the
Israelites during their wilderness wanderings.

CONCERNING THE SOCIAL LAW: 
--------------------------

Moses reviews and expands on the laws that the Lord had given the
Israelites regarding society. Following is an alphabetical topical list
of these laws.

### Animals (Deut. 22:6-7; 25:4): 

Don\'t take a mother bird from its nest. Don\'t muzzle an ox while it is
treading out the grain.

### Building (Deut. 22:8): 

Every new house must have a guardrail around the roof to prevent someone
from falling.

### Clothing (Deut. 22:5, 11-12): 

Clothing is not to be made from both linen and wool. Women are forbidden
to wear men\'s clothing, and men are forbidden to wear women\'s
clothing.

The Israelites are to wear tassels on the four corners of their cloaks.

### Dietary laws (Deut. 14:3-21; 15:19-20, 22-23): 

The Israelites are to regard certain animals as clean and others as
unclean. They are not to eat the unclean animals.

### Divorce (Deut. 24:1-4): 

There are rules governing both divorce and remarriage.

### Domestic situations (Deut. 21:10-17; 22:13-30; 24:5; 25:5-12) 

#### Captive wife (Deut. 21:10-14): 

There are rules regarding the treatment and rights of a captive woman
who is taken as a wife.

#### Multiple wives (Deut. 21:15-17): 

There are rules governing how an inheritance is to be divided among the
children of multiple wives.

#### Suspect wife (Deut. 22:13-30): 

There are rules governing various issues related to sexual purity and
faithfulness.

#### New wife (Deut. 24:5): 

A man is not to be drafted during his first year of marriage, so he can
be home with his new wife.

#### Widowed wife (Deut. 25:5-10): 

The brother of a deceased man must agree to care for his brother\'s
widow or be disgraced in the community.

#### Inappropriate wife (Deut. 25:11-12): 

She will be punished for wrongly aiding her husband in a fight with
another man.

### Guilt (Deut. 24:16): 

Parents should not be put to death for the sins of their children, or
children for the sins of their parents.

### Honesty (Deut. 25:13-16): 

Always use accurate scales.

### Hygiene (Deut. 23:9-14): 

There are rules governing personal sanitation.

### Idolatry (Deut. 13:1-14:2; 16:21-22; 17:2-7; 18:9-14, 20-22):

The practice of idolatry is strictly forbidden.

#### The prophets (Deut. 13:1-18; 18:20-22): 

Prophets who encourage people to worship pagan gods are to be stoned to
death.

#### The perversions (Deut. 14:1-2; 16:21-22; 17:2-7; 18:9-14): 

The Israelites are forbidden to engage in pagan and idolatrous
practices.

### Inquests (Deut. 21:1-9): 

If a murder victim is found and the crime cannot be solved, the leaders
of the nearest city are to sacrifice a young cow and pray: \"Our hands
did not shed this blood, nor did we see it happen. 0 LORD, forgive your
people Israel whom you have redeemed. Do not charge your people Israel
with the guilt of murdering an innocent person.\"

### Judges (Deut. 16:18-20; 17:8-13; 19:15-21; 25:1-3): 

Various laws are given to ensure just verdicts and punishments.

### Juvenile delinquency (Deut. 21:18-23): 

A stubborn and rebellious son who constantly refuses to obey his parents
must be stoned to death.

### Kings (Deut. 17:14-20): 

Five rules are given concerning Israel\'s future kings:

#### He must be an Israelite and not a foreigner (Deut. 17:15). 

#### He must not acquire great numbers of horses (Deut. 17:16). 

#### He must not take many wives (Deut. 17:17). 

#### He must not accumulate large amounts of silver and gold (Deut. 17:17). 

#### He must read and obey the law of God daily (Deut. 17:19-20). 

### Laborers (Deut. 24:14-15): 

Never take advantage of poor laborers. Pay them their wages each day
before sunset.

### Landmarks (Deut. 19:14): 

Do not move your neighbor\'s boundary stone.

### Leprosy (Deut. 24:8-9): 

Israel was to carefully observe the instructions concerning leprosy (see
Lev. 13-14).

They were also to remember how God cursed Miriam with leprosy (see Num.
12:115).

### Neighbors (Deut. 22:1-4; 23:24-25): 

If you see someone\'s ox or sheep wandering away, return it. You may eat
of the fruit from someone\'s vineyard or grainfield, but do not abuse
this privilege.

### Planting (Deut. 22:9-10): 

Don\'t plant two kinds of seed in your vineyard. Don\'t plow with an ox
and donkey yoked together.

### Pledges (Deut. 24:6, 10-13, 17-18): 

There are rules governing what may be received as security for a loan.

### Prostitution (Deut. 23:17-18): 

Both male and female prostitution is forbidden.

### Retribution (Deut. 25:17-19): 

The Israelites are commanded to wipe out the Amalekites for their cruel
acts against them.

### Servants (Deut. 15:12-18; 23:15-16; 24:7): 

There are various rules governing the treatment of servants.

### Tithes (Deut. 14:22-29; 26:12-15): 

All Israelites are to tithe their crops each year, bringing the revenue
to the Tabernacle. They also are expected to help support the Levites,
foreigners, widows, and orphans living in their town or city.

### Usury (Deut. 23:19-20): 

One can charge interest to a foreigner but not to a fellow Israelite.

### Vows (Deut. 23:21-23): 

Vows to the Lord must be promptly fulfilled, although it is not a sin to
refrain from making a vow.

### Warfare (Deut. 20:1-20): 

Instructions are given regarding the preparation for and practice of
warfare. Four types of individuals are exempted from going to battle:

#### One who has just built a new home (Deut. 20:5) 

#### One who has just planted a vineyard (Deut. 20:6) 

#### One who has just become engaged (Deut. 20:7) 

#### One who is terrified (Deut. 20:8) 

### Welfare (Deut. 24:19-22): 

Leave a portion of your crops behind for foreigners, widows, and orphans
to glean.

CONCERNING THE RELIGIOUS LAW: 
-----------------------------

Moses reviews and expands upon the laws that the Lord had given the
Israelites regarding religious and ceremonial practices. Following is an
alphabetical topical list of these laws.

### Central sanctuary (Deut. 12:1-32; 23:1-8): 

Laws are given regarding the Tabernacle.

#### The place (Deut. 12:1-32): 

\"You must seek the LORD your God at the place he himself will choose
from among all the tribes for his name to be honored. There you will
bring to the LORD your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes,
your special gifts, your offerings to fulfill a vow, your freewill
offerings, and your offerings of the firstborn animals of your flocks
and herds.\" The final, permanent location for the Tabernacle is later
revealed to be Jerusalem.

#### The prohibitions (Deut. 23:1-8): 

Four kinds of individuals are prohibited from entering the Tabernacle:

##### An emasculated person (Deut. 23:1) 

##### A person of illegitimate birth (Deut. 23:2) 

##### An Ammonite (Deut. 23:3) 

##### A Moabite (Deut. 23:3) 

### Cities of refuge (Deut. 19:1-13): 

Moses reviews the purpose for these cities (see Num. 35:9-34).

### Festivals (Deut. 16:1-17; 26:1-11) 

#### The overview (Deut. 16:1-15; 26:1-11): 

Various instructions are given regard the following festivals:

##### Passover/Festival of Unleavened Bread (Deut. 16:1-8) (see also Lev. 23:5-8) 

##### Festival of Harvest (Deut. 16:9-12) (see also Lev. 23:15-22) 

##### Festival of Shelters (Deut. 16:13-15) (see also Lev. 23:33-43) 

##### Festival of Firstfruits (Deut. 26:1-11) (see also Lev. 23:9-14) 

#### The obligations (Deut. 16:16-17): 

All Israelite men are required to attend the following three festivals
each year:

##### Passover/Festival of Unleavened Bread 

##### Festival of Harvest 

##### Festival of Shelters 

### The prophet (Deut. 18:15-19): 

Moses tells the people that the Lord will send them a prophet who will
speak for him and whom everyone must obey. The New Testament makes it
clear that Jesus was the ultimate fulfillment of this promise (see John
6:14).

### Israel (Deut. 26:16-19): 

Moses reviews Israel\'s responsibilities before the Lord. They are to
obey his commandments and be a holy people. In return, the Lord will
elevate them above all the other nations.

### Levites (Deut. 18:1-8): 

Moses reviews the Levites\' privileges and responsibilities.

### Offerings (Deut. 15:21; 17:1): 

No lame, blind, sick, or blemished animal will be accepted by God as a
sacrifice.

### Sabbath year (Deut. 15:1-15): 

All debts are to be canceled at the end of every seventh year. All
slaves who are Israelites are to be released at the end of every seventh
year as well.

DEUTERONOMY 27-28 
=================

Moses delivers his third sermon to the Israelites.

THE COMMAND TO BUILD (Deut. 27:1-8): 
------------------------------------

Israel is to construct an altar on Mount Ebal and write the laws of God
on it.

THE COMMAND TO BROADCAST (Deut. 27:9-28:68): 
--------------------------------------------

Six tribes (Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin) are to
stand on Mount Gerizim and proclaim a blessing over the Israelites (for
obeying the law). Then the other six tribes (Reuben, Gad, Asher,
Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali) are to stand on Mount Ebal and proclaim a
curse (for disobeying the law).

### The curses for disobedience (Deut. 27:14-26; 28:15-68) 

#### The reasons (Deut. 27:14-26): 

The Levites are to proclaim a curse on the following people:

##### those who make idols (Deut. 27:15) 

##### those who despise their parents (Deut. 27:16) 

##### those who move boundary markers (Deut. 27:17) 

##### those who lead the blind astray (Deut. 27:18) 

##### those who are unjust to foreigners, orphans, or widows (Deut. 27:19) 

##### those who commit incest of various sorts (Deut. 27:20, 22-23) 

##### those who practice bestiality (Deut. 27:21) 

##### those who commit murder or accept payment to do so (Deut. 27:24-25) 

##### those who do not obey the law (Deut. 27:26) 

#### The results (Deut. 28:15-68): 

If the people do not obey the laws that the Lord gives them, they will
experience curses.

##### Destruction in the land (Deut. 28:15-24, 26-31, 33-35, 38-48): 

Disobedience will result in diseases, plagues, famine, drought, dust
storms, defeat in war, infertility, constant fear and frustration, and
the enslavement of their children.

##### Dispersion from the land (Deut. 28:25, 32, 36-37, 48-68): 

Disobedience will also cause the Israelites to be surrounded by their
enemies, reduced to cannibalism, removed from the land, enslaved, and
dispersed among the nations. They will become a proverb and an object of
horror and mockery among the nations, and they will find no rest there.
The Lord will cause them to tremble and despair. They will live in
constant fear, with no reason to believe that they will survive.

### The blessings for obedience (Deut. 28:1-14): 

If the Israelites heed God\'s laws, they will experience blessings in
their towns and in the country. They will have many children, ample
crops, and large flocks and herds. They will have victory in war and
lend to many nations, borrowing from none. They will be the head and not
the tail.

DEUTERONOMY 29-30 
=================

Moses delivers his fourth and final sermon to the Israelites as they are
about to enter the Promised Land.

THE COVENANT (Deut. 29:1-29): 
-----------------------------

Moses reminds the Israelites of the Lord\'s covenant with them and urges
them to obey its laws so that they will not experience its curses.

THE CHANGE (Deut. 30:1-10): 
---------------------------

Moses tells the people that the Lord will change their hearts while they
are in captivity, and they will love the Lord wholeheartedly. The Lord
will then gather them together once again and restore them to their
land. He will bless them and make them more prosperous than ever.

THE CHOICE (Deut. 30:11-20): 
----------------------------

\"Today I have given you the choice between life and death, between
blessings and curses. I call on heaven and earth to witness the choice
you make. Oh, that you would choose life, that you and your descendants
might live! Choose to love the LORD your God and to obey him and commit
yourself to him, for he is your life.\"

DEUTERONOMY 31-34 
=================

Moses gives his parting instructions and prepares to pass on the
responsibilities of leadership to Joshua. Moses dies on Mount Nebo.

THE SETTING APART (Deut. 31:1-8, 14-15, 23): 
--------------------------------------------

Before all the people, Moses commissions Joshua as their new leader,
commanding him to be courageous, for he \"will lead these people into
the land that the LORD swore to give their ancestors.\"

THE SCRIPTURES (Deut. 31:9-13, 24-27): 
--------------------------------------

Moses finishes writing the law and instructs the Israelites to read it
every seventh year at the Festival of Shelters. This is so the people
will always know the law, and it will stand as a witness against their
sins.

THE SONG (Deut. 31:16-22, 28-30; 32:1-47) 
-----------------------------------------

### The crisis (Deut. 31:16-22, 28-30) 

#### The Lord tells Moses (Deut. 31:16-22): 

The Lord reveals that his people will eventually rebel against him after
Moses\' death and that he will severely punish them for their sins.

#### Moses tells Israel (Deut. 31:28-30): 

\"I know that after my death you will become utterly corrupt and will
turn from the path I have commanded you to follow. In the days to come,
disaster will come down on you, for you will make the LORD very angry by
doing what is evil in his sight.\"

### The contents (Deut. 32:1-43) 

#### The greatness of God (Deut. 32:1-4, 39-42): 

The Lord is Israel\'s perfect, just, and faithful Rock! He is the only
God, able to kill and to give life, to wound and to heal.

#### The grace of God (Deut. 32:5-14, 43): 

\"Jacob is \[the Lord\'s\] special possession. He found them in a desert
land, in an empty, howling wasteland. He surrounded them and watched
over them; he guarded them as his most precious possession.\"

#### The grief of God (Deut. 32:15-38) 

##### What Israel has done (Deut. 32:15-18, 28-29): 

They have rejected and abandoned God for the gods of the pagan nations.

##### What the Lord will do (Deut. 32:19-27, 30-38): 

The Lord will hide his face from them, bring calamities upon them, and
scatter them among the nations. He will bless the Gentiles.

### The challenge (Deut. 32:44-47): 

Moses commands the Israelites: \"Take to heart all the words I have
given you today. Pass them on as a command to your children so they will
obey every word of this law. These instructions are not mere words-they
are your life! By obeying them you will enjoy a long life in the land
you are crossing the Jordan River to occupy.\"

THE SUMMONS (Deut. 32:48-52): 
-----------------------------

God instructs Moses to climb Mount Nebo and gaze westward upon the
Promised Land before he dies there on the mountain.

THE SUMMATION (Deut. 33:1-29): 
------------------------------

Moses blesses each of the tribes before he dies, summarizing what will
happen to each of them in the future.

### Reuben (Deut. 33:6): 

\"Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out, even though their tribe
is small.\"

### Judah (Deut. 33:7): 

\"Give them strength to defend their cause; help them against their
enemies!\"

### Levi (Deut. 33:8-11): 

\"Now let them teach your regulations to Jacob\.... They will present
incense before you and offer whole burnt offerings on the altar.\"

### Benjamin (Deut. 33:12): 

\"The people of Benjamin are loved by the LORD and live in safety beside
him.\"

### Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) (Deut. 33:13-17): 

\"May their land be blessed by the LORD with the choice gift of rain
from the heavens \... with the finest crops of the ancient mountains.\"

### Zebulun (Deut. 33:18-19): 

\"May the people of Zebulun prosper in their expeditions abroad.\"

### Issachar (Deut. 33:18-19): 

\"May the people of Issachar prosper at home in their tents.\"

### Gad (Deut. 33:20-21): 

\"Blessed is the one who enlarges Gad\'s territory!\" I. Dan (Deut.
33:22): \"Dan is a lion\'s cub, leaping out from Bashan.\"

### Naphtali (Deut. 33:23): 

\"You are rich in favor and full of the LORD\'s blessings; may you
possess the west and the south.\"

### Asher (Deut. 33:24-25): 

\"May he be esteemed by his brothers; may he bathe his feet in olive
oil. May the bolts of your gates be of iron and bronze; may your
strength match the length of your days!\"

THE SIGHT (Deut. 34:1-4): 
-------------------------

On Mount Nebo the Lord shows Moses the entire Promised Land.

THE SEPARATION (Deut. 34:5-9): 
------------------------------

Moses dies on Mount Nebo.

### The location of his grave (Deut. 34:5-6): 

\"\[Moses\] was buried in a valley near Beth-peor in Moab, but to this
day no one knows the exact place.\"

### The length of his life (Deut. 34:7): 

\"Moses was 120 years old when he died, yet his eyesight was clear, and
he was as strong as ever.\"

### The lamentation over his death (Deut. 34:8): 

\"The people of Israel mourned thirty days for Moses on the plains of
Moab, until the customary period of mourning was over.\"

### The leader in his place (Deut. 34:9): 

Joshua son of Nun officially assumes the leadership role that had
belonged to Moses.

THE SAINT (Deut. 34:10-12): 
---------------------------

\"There has never been another prophet like Moses, whom the LORD knew
face to face.\"
