PART ONE: GOD\'S DELIVERANCE OF ISRAEL-THE PREVIEW (EXODUS 1) 
=============================================================

The first part of the book of Exodus sets the scene for God\'s
deliverance of his chosen people, Israel, from slavery in Egypt.

SECTION OUTLINE ONE (EXODUS 1) 
------------------------------

Israel is being persecuted by an Egyptian pharaoh, probably Thutmose I.

### THE REASONS FOR PERSECUTION (Ex. 1:1-10) 

#### Fruitfulness (Ex. 1:1-7): 

Beginning with 70 individuals, the nation of Israel multiplies so
quickly that they soon fill the land.

#### Fear (Ex. 1:8-10): 

Such growth causes Pharaoh great concern, since the Israelites might
join others and attack Egypt.

### THE RESULTING PERSECUTION (Ex. 1:11-22) 

#### Pharaoh\'s building decree (Ex. 1:11-14): 

To lessen the threat from Israel\'s growing strength, Pharaoh enslaves
the Israelites, forcing them to build two storage cities, Pithom and
Rameses. In spite of persecution, Israel continues to multiply.

#### Pharaoh\'s bloody decree (Ex. 1:15-22) 

##### His order to the midwives (Ex. 1:15-21): 

In his continuing efforts to curb Israel\'s strength, Pharaoh tells the
Hebrew midwives to kill all Israelite male babies at birth. \"But
because the midwives feared God, they refused to obey the king and
allowed the boys to live.\"

##### His order to the masses (Ex. 1:22): 

Finally, Pharaoh orders his people to throw all Israelite male babies
into the Nile River.

PART TWO: GOD\'S DELIVERANCE OF ISRAEL-THE OVERVIEW (EX. 2-NUM. 36) 
===================================================================

This lengthy section covers the life and mission of Moses. We see him as
the prince of Egypt, the shepherd of Midian, and the lawgiver of Israel.

SECTION OUTLINE TWO (EXODUS 2:1-15) 
-----------------------------------

This section details Moses\' early years and his role as the prince of
Egypt.

### THE BABY IN THE BASKET (Ex. 2:1-10) 

#### Moses and his parents (Ex. 2:1-3): 

Moses is born to a Levite couple, Amram and Jochebed (see Ex. 6:20).
After hiding him from Pharaoh for three months, they place Moses in a
small basket and set it along the bank of the Nile River.

#### Moses and the princess (Ex. 2:4-10) 

##### Rescuing Moses (Ex. 2:4-6): 

Pharaoh\'s daughter discovers the baby Moses and has compassion for him.

##### Raising Moses (Ex. 2:7-10): 

Moses\' sister, Miriam, has been watching the princess and suggests to
her that a young Hebrew mother be found to nurse the baby. The princess
agrees, and Miriam gets her mother so she can nurse her own child! Moses
is named and raised by Pharaoh\'s daughter.

### THE MAN IN THE MIDDLE (Ex. 2:11-15) 

#### The helpless slave (Ex. 2:11-12): 

Moses kills an Egyptian who is brutally beating a Hebrew slave.

#### The hostile slave (Ex. 2:13-15): 

The next day Moses rebukes a Hebrew slave who is mistreating a fellow
Hebrew. But the man turns the tables on Moses, asking, \"Do you plan to
kill me as you killed that Egyptian yesterday?\" Realizing that his deed
had become known, Moses flees to Midian.

SECTION OUTLINE THREE (EXODUS 2:16-4:31) 
----------------------------------------

This section recounts Moses\' years as the shepherd of Midian.

### THE MARRIAGE OF MOSES (Ex. 2:16-22) 

#### He assists a Midianite girl at a well (Ex. 2:16-20): 

Moses drives away some unfriendly shepherds, allowing some women to
water their flocks.

#### He accepts a Midianite girl as his wife (Ex. 2:21-22): 

Moses marries Zipporah, one of the women he helped at the well, and
fathers two sons, Gershom (Ex. 2:22) and Eliezer (Ex. 18:4).

### THE MISSION OF MOSES (Ex. 2:23-3:10) 

#### Israel\'s misery (Ex. 2:23-25): 

Egypt\'s persecution of Israel intensifies. God hears their cries and
remembers his covenant with Abraham.

#### Moses\' mystery (Ex. 3:1-3): 

He sees a bush engulfed in flames, but it is not consumed by the fire.

#### God\'s message (Ex. 3:4-10) 

##### Take your shoes off! (Ex. 3:4-9) 

###### The why of the matter (Ex. 3:5): 

\"You are standing on holy ground.\"

###### The what of the matter (Ex. 3:7-8): 

The Lord says he has heard the Israelites\' cries and will deliver them.

##### Put your shoes on! (Ex. 3:10): The Lord tells Moses that he has chosen him to deliver his people. 

### THE MISGIVINGS OF MOSES (Ex. 3:11-4:23) 

#### The protests (Ex. 3:11-15; 4:10-17) 

##### First objection (Ex. 3:11-12) 

###### Moses says that he is not important enough to appear before Pharaoh. 

###### The Lord tells Moses that he will be with him and will bring him back to Mount Sinai. 

##### Second objection (Ex. 3:13-15) 

###### Moses complains that he holds no authority. 

###### The Lord tells Moses that he, the \"I Am,\" is his authority. 

##### Third objection (Ex. 4:1-5) 

###### Moses insists that the people will not believe him. 

###### The Lord turns Moses\' staff into a snake and tells him that the people will believe him when they see this. 

##### Fourth objection (Ex. 4:10-17) 

###### Moses complains that he is not a good speaker. 

###### The Lord tells Moses that Aaron, his brother, will be his spokesman. 

#### The prophecies (Ex. 3:16-22) 

##### Israel will be brought out of Egypt and into Canaan (Ex. 3:16-17). 

##### Israel\'s leaders will believe Moses (Ex. 3:18). 

##### Pharaoh will oppose Moses (Ex. 3:19). 

##### Egypt will suffer God\'s judgment (Ex. 3:20). 

##### Israel will receive riches from Egypt (Ex. 3:21-22). 

#### The proofs (Ex. 4:2-9) 

First proof (Ex. 4:2-5): Moses\' rod turns into a snake.

##### Second proof (Ex. 4:6-8): 

Moses\' hand becomes leprous.

##### Third proof (Ex. 4:9): 

The Nile River waters will later become blood.

#### The permission (Ex. 4:10-18): 

God allows Moses\' older brother, Aaron, to accompany Moses as
spokesman. Moses receives permission from his father-in-law to leave.

#### The preparation (Ex. 4:19-20): 

Moses says good-bye to his father-in-law.

#### The plan (Ex. 4:21-23): 

God will help the hand of Moses (in performing miracles) but will harden
the heart of Pharaoh!

### THE MISTAKE OF MOSES (Ex. 4:24-26): 

For some reason Moses carelessly neglected, or perhaps even refused, to
circumcise his firstborn son, Gershom.

#### The anger of God (Ex. 4:24): 

This carelessness almost costs Moses his life!

#### The act of Zipporah (Ex. 4:25-26): 

Realizing the danger, Zipporah quickly circumcises their son.

### THE MEETINGS OF MOSES (Ex. 4:27-31) 

#### Moses meets with his brother Aaron (Ex. 4:27-28): 

Moses now tells Aaron the details of their mission.

#### Moses meets with the elders of Israel (Ex. 4:29-31): 

Upon hearing Aaron\'s message and seeing Moses\' miracles, the elders
believe them and worship God.

SECTION OUTLINE FOUR (EXODUS 5-17) 
----------------------------------

This section details Moses\' role and experiences as the lawgiver of
Israel.

### LIBERATING THE PEOPLE OF GOD (Ex. 5:1-13:22) 

#### The problems (Ex. 5:1-23) 

##### From Pharaoh (Ex. 5:1-14) 

###### Pharaoh insults the God of Israel (Ex. 5:1-3) 

####### Moses to Pharaoh: \"This is what the LORD, the God of Israel, says: \'Let my people go.\'\" 

####### Pharaoh to Moses: \"I don\'t know the LORD, and I will not let Israel go.\" 

###### Pharaoh increases the burdens of Israel (Ex. 5:4-14): 

He forces them to gather their own straw to make bricks.

##### From the people (Ex. 5:15-23): 

Upon learning the reason for their additional burdens, the Jewish elders
become angry with Moses and Aaron. Moses, in turn, complains to God.

#### The promise (Ex. 6:1-30) 

##### The nature (of the promise) (Ex. 6:1-13): 

Moses is reassured that the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob-the Lord
himself-will indeed deliver them from Egypt and lead them into the
Promised Land!

##### The names (Ex. 6:14-30): 

These verses record the families of Reuben, Simeon, and Levi (the
ancestor of Moses and Aaron).

#### The prophet (Ex. 7:1-2): 

Aaron is appointed by God to serve as a prophet and spokesman for Moses.

#### The power (Ex. 7:3-7): 

God will soon pour out his divine wrath upon the land of Egypt!

#### The preliminaries (Ex. 7:8-13): 

When Moses and Aaron confront Pharaoh again, Pharaoh demands that they
demonstrate the power of their God. So Aaron throws down his staff,
which turns into a snake. Pharaoh\'s magicians do the same, but Aaron\'s
snake swallows up their snakes.

#### The plagues (Ex. 7:14-10:29; 11:1, 4-10): 

Because Pharaoh refuses to listen, the Lord begins a series of 10
plagues on Egypt. After each plague, the Lord gives Pharaoh opportunity
to change his mind, but Pharaoh continually refuses.

##### Blood (Ex. 7:14-25): 

Moses strikes the Nile with his staff, causing its waters to change into
blood. Soon all water in Egypt is polluted in similar fashion.

##### Frogs (Ex. 8:1-15): 

A plague of frogs covers every square foot of the land. Pharaoh begs
Moses to remove them, promising Israel\'s deliverance, but then refuses
after the frogs disappear.

##### Gnats (Ex. 8:16-19): 

Aaron strikes the dust, and gnats suddenly infest the entire nation.

Pharaoh\'s magicians advise him to release Israel, but he again refuses.

##### Flies (Ex. 8:20-32): 

Egypt is filled with great swarms of flies, but none appear in the land
of Goshen, where the Israelites live. Again Pharaoh promises to set
Israel free but refuses when the flies are gone.

##### Plague on livestock (Ex. 9:1-7): 

All Egyptian livestock suddenly become sick and begin to die, but not
one Israelite animal is affected.

##### Boils (Ex. 9:8-12): 

After Moses tosses soot from a furnace into the air, festering boils
break out on people and animals.

##### Hail and lightning (Ex. 9:13-35): 

Before this plague, God tells Moses and Pharaoh the purpose of the
plagues: \"that you might see my power and that my fame might spread
throughout the earth.\" Some Egyptians heed God\'s warning and bring
their livestock in from the fields for protection from the fearful
lightning and hail. Pharaoh tells Moses that he will let his people go
but changes his mind after the plague stops.

##### Locusts (Ex. 10:1-20): 

Pharaoh agrees to allow only the men of Israel to go worship the Lord.
Moses rejects this offer, and the Lord sends a strong east wind that
blows in the worst locust plague in Egyptian history! Pharoah repents,
the Lord removes the locusts, and then Pharaoh changes his mind yet
again.

##### Darkness (Ex. 10:21-29): 

The Lord sends a deep, terrifying darkness over all of Egypt for three
days. Pharaoh agrees to let the people go, but the flocks must stay.
Moses refuses.

##### Death of firstborn sons (Ex. 11:1, 4-10): The Lord tells Moses that this plague will result in Israel\'s freedom. 

#### The preparation (Ex. 12:1-11, 14-28): 

Each Israelite family is instructed to slay a lamb on the fourteenth of
the first month of the Hebrew calendar (in the spring). Its blood must
be sprinkled on the door frame of the home.

#### The protection (Ex. 12:12-13): 

The Lord warns the people that he will \"kill all the firstborn sons and
firstborn male animals in the land of Egypt.\" But he reassures them
that \"when I see the blood, I will pass over you,\" sparing the
firstborn of the home from death.

#### The panic (Ex. 12:29-33): 

Following the death of his firstborn on the fourteenth of the month,
Pharaoh summons Moses and commands him to lead Israel out of Egypt.

#### The presents (Ex. 11:2-3; 12:34-36): 

The frightened Egyptians give the departing Israelites clothing and
costly gifts of silver and gold.

#### The parting (Ex. 12:37-39): 

Some 600,000 men (some of whom were not Israelites), along with their
wives and children, leave Egypt that night.

#### The period of time (Ex. 12:40-41): 

Israel has been in Egypt for the past 430 years.

#### The Passover festival (Ex. 12:42-51): 

Foreigners are forbidden to eat the Passover lamb unless they are
circumcised. No bone of the Passover lamb is to be broken.

#### The parents and children (Ex. 13:1-16): 

All firstborn Israelite sons are to be dedicated to God. Upon reaching
the Promised Land, the Israelites are to observe the Passover feast
yearly, and parents are to tell their children of God\'s faithfulness in
bringing them out of Egypt.

#### The pillar of cloud and fire (Ex. 13:17-22): 

God leads his people to the Promised Land on a longer route through the
wilderness and toward the Red Sea. A pillar of cloud leads them by day,
and a pillar of fire leads them by night.

### LEADING THE PEOPLE OF GOD FROM EGYPT TO MOUNT SINAI (Ex. 14:1-17:16) 

#### Phase one: Israel at the Red Sea (Ex. 14:1-18) 

##### The decision of Pharaoh: Follow up! (Ex. 14:1-9): 

Regretting his decision to free Israel, Pharaoh orders the Egyptian
army, including 600 chariots, to capture the Israelites by the Red Sea.

##### The despair of the people: Give up! (Ex. 14:10-12): 

In great fear and anger the Israelites cry out to Moses, \"Our Egyptian
slavery was far better than dying out here in the wilderness!\"

##### The declaration of Moses: Look up! (Ex. 14:13-14): 

Moses reassures them, \"Don\'t be afraid. Just stand where you are and
watch the LORD rescue you.\"

##### The decree of God: Lift up! (Ex. 14:15-18): 

Moses is told to raise his staff over the Red Sea, dividing the waters
and allowing Israel to walk across on dry ground.

#### Phase two: Israel crosses the Red Sea (Ex. 14:19-15:21) 

##### The protecting (Ex. 14:19-20): 

The pillar of cloud moves between the Egyptians and the Israelites. At
night it becomes a pillar of fire once again, resulting in darkness for
the Egyptians but glorious light for the Israelites.

##### The parting (Ex. 14:21-22): 

A strong east wind blows and parts the Red Sea, forming walls of water
on each side.

##### The perishing (Ex. 14:23-31): 

Attempting to pursue the Israelites across the dry path, the Egyptians
drown when Moses lifts his hand, causing the waters to collapse on them.

##### The praising (Ex. 15:1-21): 

A great victory celebration is held on the eastern banks of the Red Sea.
Moses and his sister, Miriam, lead the nation in singing, music, and
dancing.

#### Phase three: Israel at Marah (Ex. 15:22-26) 

##### The problem (Ex. 15:22-24): 

After traveling three days without finding water, the people discover
the oasis at Marah has only bitter and undrinkable water.

##### The purification (Ex. 15:25): 

The Lord tells Moses to throw a tree in the water and it will become
clear and cold.

##### The promise (Ex. 15:26): 

Obeying God will result in divine protection from the diseases he
inflicted upon the Egyptians.

#### Phase four: Israel at Elim (Ex. 15:27): 

This oasis has 12 springs and 70 palm trees.

#### Phase five: Israel in the Sin Desert (Ex. 16:1-36) 

##### A special diet (Ex. 16:1-22, 31-36): 

In spite of the Israelites\' constant complaining, the Lord sends them
quail to eat in the evening and provides a daily supply of bread
(\"manna\") from heaven.

##### A special day (Ex. 16:23-30): 

Moses tells the people to keep the Sabbath, a weekly day of rest.

#### Phase six: Israel at Rephidim (Ex. 17:1-16) 

##### The rock struck open by Moses (Ex. 17:1-7): 

At a place called Rephidim, the thirsty and rebellious Israelites
threaten to kill Moses. At God\'s command, Moses strikes a rock there,
which supernaturally gushes forth with cold, clear water!

##### The foe struck down by Moses (Ex. 17:8-16): 

Joshua leads the Israelite army to victory over the fierce Amalekites as
Moses prays for them from a nearby hill. Aaron and Hur assist Moses as
he holds up his staff during the battle.

SECTION OUTLINE FIVE (EXODUS 18:1-NUMBERS 10:10) 
------------------------------------------------

The nation travels to Mount Sinai and remains there for eleven months
and five days. Three significant events transpire during this time: the
constitution of Israel, the prostitution of Israel, and the restitution
of Israel.

### THE CONSTITUTION OF ISRAEL (MOSES AND THE LAW OF GOD): 

the requirements for fellowship (Ex. 18:1-31:18)

#### The circumstances preceding the constitution (Ex. 18:1-19:25) 

##### The welcome of Moses (Ex. 18:1-12): 

Moses is met by his wife, Zipporah; his sons, Gershom and Eliezer; and
his father-in-law, Jethro. He relates how God has led the nation out of
Egypt!

##### The wisdom of Jethro (Ex. 18:13-27): 

Jethro suggests that Moses appoint capable men to serve as judges
regarding the various disputes among the people.

##### The wonders of God (Ex. 19:1-25) 

###### God\'s words from Mount Sinai (Ex. 19:1-15): 

While Israel is camped at the base of Mount Sinai, Moses climbs the
mountain and is instructed to inform the people that the Lord himself
will visit them in the form of a thick cloud at the end of three days.
Thus, all the people must purify themselves for this meeting.

###### God\'s works on Mount Sinai (Ex. 19:16-25): 

The Lord appears, accompanied by thunder, lightning, and a loud blast
from a ram\'s horn. Mount Sinai is suddenly covered with smoke. Moses
and Aaron ascend the mountain to meet with God.

#### The contents of the constitution (Ex. 20:1-Lev. 20:27) 

##### The moral code: The Ten Commandments (Ex. 20:1-26; 24:1-18; 31:18) 

###### The requirements (Ex. 20:1-17; 31:18) 

####### \"Do not worship any other gods besides me\" (Ex. 20:3). 

####### \"Do not make idols of any kind\" (Ex. 20:4). 

####### \"Do not misuse the name of the LORD your God\" (Ex.20:7). 

####### \"Remember to observe the Sabbath day by keeping it holy\" (Ex. 20:8). 

####### \"Honor your father and mother\" (Ex. 20:12). 

####### \"Do not murder\" (Ex. 20:13). 

####### \"Do not commit adultery\" (Ex. 20:14). 

####### \"Do not steal\" (Ex. 20:15). 

####### \"Do not testify falsely\" (Ex. 20:16). 

####### \"Do not covet\" (Ex. 20:17). 

###### The reaction (Ex. 20:18-23): 

Moses reassures the frightened crowd that God\'s purpose in appearing is
to impress upon them his awesome power.

###### The ratification (Ex. 20:24-26; 24:1-8): 

As instructed, Moses builds an altar with 12 pillars representing the 12
tribes. He then ratifies God\'s covenant with Israel by sprinkling
animal blood on the altar.

###### The radiance (Ex. 24:9-18): 

Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu (Aaron\'s sons), and 70 Israelite elders
are allowed to see God on Mount Sinai. \"Under his feet there seemed to
be a pavement of brilliant sapphire, as clear as the heavens.\" After
this, Moses ascends the mountain alone, where he spends the next 40
days.

##### The social code (community laws): Following is an alphabetical listing of the topics these laws address. 

###### Blasphemy (Ex. 22:28; Lev. 19:12; 20:9): 

The punishment for speaking against God, against rulers, or against
parents is death.

###### Blessing (conditions for it) (Lev. 26:3-13): 

Obedience to God assures Israel of fruitful crops,

> victory over their enemies, and the very presence of God among them!

###### Blood (Ex. 23:18; Lev. 17:10-16; 19:26): 

No blood sacrifice is to be offered along with anything containing
yeast. The eating or drinking of blood is strictly prohibited, for \"the
life of any creature is in its blood.\"

###### Childbirth and ceremonial cleansing (Lev. 12:1-8): 

A mother will be ceremonially unclean for 41 days following the birth of
a son and for 80 days following the birth of a daughter. Upon offering a
lamb and some birds, the mother\'s time of defilement will be over.

###### Dedication of persons and things (Lev. 27:1-29): 

These \"persons\" fall into four categories: those from 20 to 60, from 5
to 20, from one month to 5 years, and over 60. The \"things\" include
animals, homes, and fields.

###### Diet (Lev. 11:1-47; 20:25): 

These creatures are permitted as a source of food: all animals that have
cloven hooves and chew their cud, fish with fins and scales, insects
that jump, and clean birds.

###### Disfiguring oneself (Lev. 19:27-28): 

The Israelites are not to shave certain sections of their

> head, to cut themselves, or to wear tattoos, because pagans do these
> things.

###### Disobedience (Lev. 26:14-46): If the Israelites disobey God\'s laws, they will experience 

> punishments: sudden terror, wasting diseases, defeat by their enemies,
> famines, attacks by wild animals, destruction of their cities, and
> exile. But true repentance will bring restoration.

###### Elderly (Lev. 19:32): 

Israel is to give due honor and show great respect to the elderly.

###### Fathers and daughters (Ex. 21:7-11): 

There are laws concerning work contracts and

> weddings.

###### God\'s angel (Ex. 23:20-23): 

If the Israelites obey this angel, God will assure them victory over all
their enemies. Many people today believe this angel was Christ himself.

###### Handicapped people (Lev. 19:14): The deaf are not to be cursed nor the blind taken advantage of. 

###### Hatred (Lev. 19:17-18): 

The Israelites are forbidden to hate, to bear a grudge, or to seek
vengeance against others. People are to love their neighbors as
themselves.

###### Helping one\'s enemy (Ex. 23:4-5): 

An enemy\'s ox or donkey that has strayed away must be returned.
Assistance must be rendered to an enemy\'s donkey that is struggling
under its load.

###### Holiness (Ex. 22:31; Lev. 19:1-3; 20:7, 26): 

The bottom line is: \"You must be holy because I, the LORD your God, am
holy.\" This involves many things, including respecting one\'s parents
and observing the Sabbath.

###### Idolatry (Ex. 22:20; 23:13, 24; Lev. 18:24-30; 19:4; 20:1-5; 26:1): Israel is forbidden even to 

> speak the names of pagan gods, and worshiping them warrants death by
> stoning.

###### Land (Ex. 23:10-11; Lev. 19:23-25): 

There are various laws governing the planting, eating, and dedication of
crops.

###### Leprosy (Lev. 13:1-59; 14:1-57; Num. 5:1-4): 

There are instructions regarding leprosy, including its recognition, its
effect on ceremonial cleanness, and the sacrifices to be offered for it.

###### Lying (Ex. 23:1-3, 6-7; Lev. 19:11, 16): 

The Israelites are prohibited from slandering others and lying, even to
help a poor person.

###### Marriage (Ex. 22:16-17): 

There are laws concerning the payment of dowries.

###### Masters and slaves (Ex. 21:1-6): 

There are laws concerning slaves and their families. Some of these laws
address the release of slaves or the actions to be taken if slaves
choose to remain with their masters.

###### Obedience (Ex. 23:25-33; Lev. 20:22-24): 

God will reward the Israelites\' obedience by providing them with
abundant food, long lives, and victory over their enemies. They will
also be spared from diseases, miscarriages, and barrenness.

###### Punishment for harming others (Ex. 21:12-36; 22:1-15, 21-24; Lev. 24:17-22): 

Those who commit willful murder, engage in slave-trading, or curse
one\'s parents must be put to death. All victims must receive payment
from the guilty, and there are severe punishments for those who exploit
widows and orphans. In essence, the punishment is to fit the crime,
demanding eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

###### Poor (Ex. 22:25-27; Lev. 19:9-10): 

The clothes of the poor cannot be kept as pledge for repayment. Farmers
are to leave behind some of the grain in the fields and the grapes on
the vine so that the poor can collect them.

###### Redemption of land (Lev. 25:24-55): 

There are special laws regarding slaves who are Israelites. In the
jubilee year (occurring every 50 years), land must be returned to its
original owner, and Israelite slaves must be set free.

###### Righteous actions (Lev. 19:15, 35-37): 

Judges are commanded to render just decisions. Everybody must use
accurate measurements.

####### Separation of cattle, seed, and clothing (Lev. 19:19): 

The Israelites are not to mix two kinds of these things. They are not to
plow with two kinds of animals, to plant two kinds of seed in the same
field, or to use two kinds of fabric woven in an article of clothing.

####### Sexual discharges (Lev. 15:1-33): 

Instructions are given regarding a man\'s seminal discharge and a
woman\'s menstrual flow. cc.

####### Sexual impurities: Punishments are imposed for various sexual sins. 

######## Adultery (Lev. 18:20; 19:20-22; 20:10, 14) 

######## Bestiality (Ex. 22:19; Lev. 18:23; 20:15-16) 

######## Homosexuality (Lev. 18:22; 20:13) 

######## Incest (Lev. 18:1-18; 20:11-12, 17, 19-21) 

######## Prostitution (Lev. 19:29) 

######## Relations during menstruation (Lev. 18:19; 20:18) 

####### Stealing (Ex. 23:8; Lev. 19:13): 

All kinds of stealing are prohibited, including theft, taking of bribes,
and cheating workers out of their wages.

####### Tithe (Ex. 22:29-30; 23:19; Lev. 27:30-34): 

Ten percent of Israel\'s crops and livestock are to be given to God.

####### Treatment of foreigners (Ex. 23:9; Lev. 19:33-34): 

Israelites are not to oppress or take advantage of foreigners. They
should love them as they love themselves.

####### Witchcraft (Ex. 22:18; Lev. 18:21; 19:31; 20:6, 27): 

Sorcerers are to be put to death.

##### The spiritual code (laws dealing with worship, feasts, sacrifices, the priesthood, etc.): For a fuller discussion of the spiritual code, see the section under subhead C, \"The Restitution of Israel (Moses and the Tabernacle).\" 

### THE PROSTITUTION OF ISRAEL (MOSES AND THE GOLD CALF): 

the ruination of fellowship (Ex. 32:1-35; 33:1-23; 34:1-35)

#### The grief (Ex. 32:1-35; 33:1-6) 

##### The perversion Israel (Ex. 32:1-8): 

While Moses was on Mount Sinai, the people pressured Aaron into
constructing a gold calf image. Then they worshiped it and indulged
themselves in pagan revelry.

##### The prayers Israel (Ex. 32:9-14, 30-34): 

Moses pleads for the people before God, reminding him of his covenant
with Abraham. So God does not destroy Israel.

##### The punishment Israel (Ex. 32:15-29, 35): 

Moses descends the mountain and sees the idolatry and immorality among
the Israelites. He breaks the tablets containing the Ten Commandments,
melts down and grinds the gold calf into powder, mixes it with water,
and forces the people to drink it. Moses rebukes Aaron and orders the
Levites to kill 3,000 of the primary troublemakers.

##### The promise Israel (Ex. 33:1-6): 

God will send an angel to drive out Israel\'s enemies, but God will not
go with them.

#### The glory (Ex. 33:7-23; 34:1-35) 

##### The grace of God (Ex. 33:7-17): 

God himself meets with Moses at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting and
speaks to him as one friend to another. At Moses\' request, God agrees
to continue with Israel on their journey.

##### The grandeur of God (Ex. 33:18-23; 34:5-9, 18-35): 

Moses is allowed to see God\'s glory while standing in the cleft of the
rock, and it causes Moses\' face to glow.

##### The guarantee of God (Ex. 34:1-4, 10-17): 

God writes the Ten Commandments on two tablets once again and promises
to drive Israel\'s enemies out of the land of Canaan.

### THE RESTITUTION OF ISRAEL (MOSES AND THE TABERNACLE): 

The restoration of fellowship

#### The statistics concerning the Tabernacle (Ex. 25:9; 26:30): 

God gives Moses exact details for building the Tabernacle.

##### Its gifts (Ex. 25:1-8; 35:4-29; 36:5-7; Num. 7:1-89): 

God gives Moses a list of acceptable gifts for the Tabernacle: gold,
silver, fine linen, etc. He also describes the proper kind of giver:
\"Everyone who wants to may bring me an offering.\" Numbers 7 describes
the gifts presented by the 12 leaders of the tribes during a 12-day
period of time.

##### Its materials (Ex. 26:1; 27:10; 30:18; 35:7): 

The Tabernacle is to be constructed from silver, bronze, fine linen, and
animal skins.

##### Its craftsmen (Ex. 31:1-11; 35:30-35; 36:1-4): 

Bezalel from the tribe of Judah and Oholiab from the tribe of Dan are
appointed to supervise the building of the Tabernacle.

##### Its court (Ex. 27:9-15, 18; 38:9-17): 

The Tabernacle is to be 150 feet long, 75 feet wide, and 7½ feet high.

##### Its entrance (Ex. 27:16-19; 38:18-20): 

The Tabernacle is to be covered by a curtain that is thirty feet wide.

##### Its curtains (Ex. 26:1-13; 36:8-18) 

###### The linen curtains (Ex. 26:1-6; 36:8-13) 

###### The goat-hair curtains (Ex. 26:7-13; 36:14-18) 

##### Its coverings of ram skins (Ex. 26:14; 36:19) 

##### Its boards and sockets (Ex. 26:15-29; 36:20-34): 

There are to be 48 boards for the tent itself, each 15 feet high by 2¼
feet wide.

##### Its incense and scented oils (Ex. 30:22-29, 34-38; 37:29): 

Incense and scented oils for the Tabernacle are to be made by mixing
together ingredients such as pure frankincense, liquid myrrh, fragrant
cinnamon, and olive oil.

##### Its bronze altar (Ex. 27:1-8; 38:1-7): 

The bronze altar is to be made of acacia wood covered with bronze, 7½
feet wide by 4 ½ feet high, with a horn on each corner.

##### Its bronze washbasin (Ex. 30:17-21; 38:8): 

This washbasin is to be filled with water and used for ceremonial
cleansing. Its pedestal is to be covered with mirrors.

##### Its table (Ex. 25:23-30; 37:10-16; Lev. 24:5-9): 

This table is to be made of acacia wood overlaid with gold. It is to be
3 feet long, 1½ feet wide, and 2¼ feet high. Twelve loaves of the Bread
of the Presence are to be placed on this table each Sabbath day.

##### Its lampstand (Ex. 25:31-40; 27:20-21; 37:17-24; Lev. 24:1-4; Num. 8:1-4): 

This is to be made of pure hammered gold with six branches and a center
stem, and it is to be kept lit continually.

##### Its incense altar (Ex. 30:1-10; 37:25-28): 

This altar is to be made of acacia wood overlaid with gold. It is to be
1 ½ feet square and 3 feet high and is to be placed in front of the
curtain of the Most Holy Place.

##### Its Ark of the Covenant (Ex. 25:10-22; 26:34; 37:1-9): 

This chest is to be made of acacia wood overlaid with gold. It is to be
3¾ feet long, 2¼ feet wide, and 2¼ feet high. The lid, called the place
of atonement, is to be made of solid gold. Two gold cherubim with
outstretched wings are to be attached to the top of the lid.

##### Its inner curtain (Ex. 26:31-33; 36:35-36): 

It is to be made of purple, blue, and scarlet fine linen and is to
separate the Holy Place from the Most Holy Place.

##### Its outer curtain (Ex. 26:36-37; 36:37-38): 

It is to be similar to the inner curtain and is to separate the outer
court from the Holy Place.

##### Its sanctuary tax (Ex. 30:11-16): 

Half a shekel (one fifth of an ounce) of silver is to be given by all
males 20 years old and older.

##### Its cost (Ex. 38:21-31): 

2,200 pounds of gold, 7,545 pounds of silver, and 5,310 pounds of bronze
are collected from the people.

##### Its completion (Ex. 39:32-40:33): 

\"The Israelites had done everything just as the LORD had commanded
Moses\.... Moses inspected all their work and blessed them.\" The
Tabernacle is then set up on the first day of the year, one year after
the Israelites have been delivered from Egypt.

##### Its glory (Ex. 40:34-38): 

\"Then the cloud covered the Tabernacle, and the glorious presence of
the LORD filled it. Moses was no longer able to enter the Tabernacle.\"

#### The stewards (priests) overseeing the Tabernacle 

##### The garments for the high priest (Ex. 28:1-5): 

God instructs Moses to begin fashioning Aaron\'s priestly clothing.

###### The ephod (Ex. 28:6-14; 39:1-7): 

This is to be made of multicolored threads of fine linen. It is to
consist of front and back pieces joined at the shoulders. The names of
Israel\'s 12 tribes are to be inscribed on two onyx stones.

###### The chest piece (Ex. 28:15-30; 39:8-21): 

This pouch made of fine linen is to be nine inches square. Twelve
precious stones representing the 12 tribes of Israel are to be mounted
on it in four rows. The Urim and Thummim are to be inserted into the
pocket of the chest piece, but it is not certain what the exact origin
and function of these stones are. Somehow they are used to determine
God\'s will.

###### The robe of the ephod (Ex. 28:31-35; 39:22-26): 

This robe is to be made of blue cloth with gold bells attached to the
hem.

###### The gold medallion (Ex. 28:36-38; 39:30-31): 

This medallion is to be made of pure gold and engraved with \"SET APART
AS HOLY TO THE LORD.\" It is to be fastened to the front of Aaron\'s
turban.

##### The garments for the other priests (Ex. 28:39-43; 29:29-30; 39:27-29): 

The other priests are to be given tunics, sashes, and headdresses.

##### The food for the priests (Ex. 29:31-34): 

Some of the priests\' food comes from the sacrifices made at the
Tabernacle.

##### The offerings for the priests (Ex. 29:35-46) 

###### Sin offering (Ex. 29:36-37): 

A young bull is to be sacrificed to ordain the priests to their office.

###### Burnt offering (Ex. 29:38-46): 

A yearling lamb is to be sacrificed every morning and evening.

##### The dedication and anointing of the priests (Ex. 29:1-28; 30:30-33; Lev. 8:1-36) 

###### As ordered by God (Ex. 29:1-28; 30:30-33): 

A young bull and two rams are to be killed, and bread without yeast is
to be offered. Blood is to be put on the tip of the right earlobe, right
thumb, and big toe of the right foot of the priests.

###### As obeyed by Moses (Lev. 8:1-36): 

Moses dedicates Aaron and his sons in the manner prescribed by God.

##### The regulations for the priests (Lev. 21:1-24; 22:1-16) 

###### Concerning defilement (Lev. 21:1-4, 10-12; 22:1-16): 

Instructions are given regarding ceremonial uncleanness due to contact
with a corpse, an unclean animal, a bodily discharge, etc.

###### Concerning disfiguring (Lev. 21:5-6): 

The priests are prohibited from shaving their heads, trimming their
beards, and cutting themselves.

###### Concerning domestic life (Lev. 21:7-9, 13-15): 

A priest cannot marry a prostitute or a divorced woman. The high
priest\'s wife must be a virgin from the tribe of Levi.

###### Concerning defects (Lev. 21:16-24): 

A person may not offer sacrifices if he is a dwarf or is blind, lame, or
humpbacked, or has suffered damage to various parts of the body.

##### The beginning of the priestly ministry (Lev. 9:1-24): 

After offering up the prescribed sacrifices, Aaron \"raise\[s\] his
hands toward the people and blesse\[s\] them\.... Fire blaze\[s\] forth
from the LORD\'S presence and consume\[s\] the burnt offering and the
fat on the altar.\"

#### The sacrifices in the Tabernacle 

##### The correct way to sacrifice (Lev. 17:1-9; 22:17-33) 

##### The burnt offering (Lev. 1:1-17; 6:8-13) 

##### The grain offering (Lev. 2:1-16; 6:14-23) 

##### The peace offering (Lev. 3:1-17; 7:11-38; 19:5-8) 

##### The sin offering (Lev. 4:1-35; 6:24-30) 

##### The guilt offering (Lev. 5:1-19; 6:1-7; 7:1-10) 

##### The offering for the firstborn (Ex. 34:19-20) 

#### The special days of the Tabernacle (Ex. 23:14-17; 31:12-17; 34:18, 21-26; 35:1-3; Lev. 16:1-34; 19:30; 23:1-44; 25:1-24; 26:2) 

##### The Sabbath day (Ex. 31:12-17; 34:21; 35:1-3; Lev. 19:30; 23:1-3; 26:2): 

Israel is commanded to rest on the seventh day and keep it holy. Those
who desecrate it are to be put to death. The Sabbath is intended to
remind Israel of two things (Ex. 31:17):

###### God created the world in six days and then rested. 

###### God has a special relationship with Israel. 

##### The Sabbath year (Lev. 25:1-7): 

Israel is to let the land rest from cultivation every seventh year.

##### The Year of Jubilee (Lev. 25:8-24): 

Every fiftieth year all public and private debts are to be cancelled and
all land returned to the original owners.

##### The Passover (Lev. 23:4-5): 

This festival occurs on the fourteenth day of the first month. It
celebrates Israel\'s deliverance from slavery in Egypt after the angel
of the Lord passed over the homes marked with blood on the doorposts.

##### The Festival of Unleavened Bread (Ex. 34:18; Lev. 23:6-8): 

This festival begins on the fifteenth day of the first month. For seven
days no bread made with yeast is to be eaten. All Israelite males are
required to be present at the Tabernacle during this festival.

##### The Festival of Firstfruits (Lev. 23:9-14): 

During this festival, the Israelites are to offer a portion of their
first crops of the harvest as well as a year-old lamb with no physical
defects. All males are required to be present at the Tabernacle during
this festival.

##### The Festival of Harvest (Lev. 23:15-22): 

This festival follows the Festival of Firstfruits by seven weeks. An
offering of bread is made, and several animals are to be sacrificed.

##### The Festival of Trumpets (Lev. 23:23-25): 

This day of rest occurs on the first day of the seventh month and is
celebrated by the blowing of trumpets.

##### The Day of Atonement (Lev. 16:1-34; 23:26-32): 

All of Israel is to fast on the tenth day of the seventh month in
contemplation and sorrow for sin. On this day, atonement will be made by
the high priest for the Most Holy Place and the rest of the Tabernacle,
as well as for the sins of the people.

##### The Festival of Shelters (Lev. 23:33-44): 

Beginning on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, families are to
live in shelters made of tree branches to commemorate Israel\'s
wanderings in the wilderness after their deliverance from Egypt. All
Israelite males are to be present at the Tabernacle during this
festival.

#### The survey for the Tabernacle 

##### The census of the regular tribes (Num. 1:1-46; 2:1-34) 

###### The figures (Num. 1:1-46) 

####### The names of the tribal leaders (Num. 1:1-16): 

The leaders of each of Israel\'s tribes (minus Levi) are recorded.

####### The number of the tribal laity (Num. 1:17-46): 

The grand total (minus the Levites) of all males at least 20 years old
is 603,550.

####### The largest tribe is Judah (74,600), and the smallest, Manasseh (32,200). 

###### The field positions (Num. 2:1-34): 

Each tribe is assigned a place to set up camp in relation to the
Tabernacle.

####### East side (Num. 2:1-9): 

Judah (leader), Issachar, and Zebulun

####### South side (Num. 2:10-17): 

Reuben (leader), Simeon, and Gad

####### West side (Num. 2:18-24): 

Ephraim (leader), Manasseh, and Benjamin

####### North side (Num. 2:25-34): 

Dan (leader), Asher, and Naphtali

##### The census of the religious tribe (Levi) 

###### The facts (Num. 1:47-54; 3:1-17, 38-51; 8:5-26): 

The Levites are not to be included in the regular census, for God has
especially adopted them and made them supervisors over the Tabernacle.
All male Levites one month old and older are to be counted. They are to
begin serving at the Tabernacle at age 25 and must retire at age 50.

###### The figures (Num. 3:18-24, 27-30, 33-35) 

####### Gershonite clan (Num. 3:21-24): 7,500 males 

####### Kohathite clan (Num. 3:27-30): 8,600 males 

####### Merarite clan (Num. 3:33-35): 6,200 males 

###### The field assignments (Num. 3:25-26, 31-32, 36-37; 4:1-49) 

####### Gershonites (Num. 3:25-26; 4:21-28, 38-41): 

They are to camp on the west side of the Tabernacle and are responsible
for its curtains and coverings.

####### Kohathites (Num. 3:31-32; 4:1-20, 34-37): 

They are to camp on the south side of the Tabernacle and are responsible
for its furniture (the Ark, the lampstand, etc.).

####### Merarites (Num. 3:36-37; 4:29-33, 42-49): 

They are to camp on the north side of the Tabernacle and are responsible
for its crossbars, posts, frames, etc.

#### The standard procedures of the Tabernacle (Num. 5:5-31; 9:1-14) 

##### Regarding unfaithfulness (Num. 5:5-31) 

###### Jealousy removed (Num. 5:11-31): 

If a husband is suspicious that his wife has been unfaithful, a priest
must pronounce a curse over a jar of water and make the woman drink it.
If she is guilty, she will become infertile.

###### Justice restored (Num. 5:5-10): 

Those who wrong others are to make restitution to those they have
wronged.

##### Regarding uncleanness (Num. 9:1-14): 

A second Passover is established for those who cannot participate in the
first due to ceremonial uncleanness. Instructions are also given
concerning foreigners and those who disregard Passover.

#### The separated (Nazirites) of the Tabernacle (Num. 6:1-21): 

Nazirites, who have dedicated themselves totally to God, are required to
observe three vows:

##### Abstain from anything that comes from the grapevine (Num. 6:3-4). 

##### Abstain from cutting their hair (Num. 6:5). 

##### Completely avoid going near a dead body (Num. 6:6-7). 

#### The supplication (prayer) to be uttered from the Tabernacle (Num. 6:22-27): 

Aaron and his sons, the priests, are instructed to pronounce this
blessing over the people of Israel: \"May the LORD bless you and protect
you. May the LORD smile on you and be gracious to you. May the LORD show
you his favor and give you his peace.\"

#### The support for the Tabernacle (Num. 7:1-89): 

The gifts presented by the leaders of Israel\'s twelve tribes are
recorded.

##### Day one (Num. 7:12-17): 

Judah\'s offering

##### Day two (Num. 7:18-23): 

Issachar\'s offering

##### Day three (Num. 7:24-29): 

Zebulun\'s offering

##### Day four (Num. 7:30-35): 

Reuben\'s offering

##### Day five (Num. 7:36-41): 

Simeon\'s offering

##### Day six (Num. 7:42-47): 

Gad\'s offering

##### Day seven (Num. 7:48-53): 

Ephraim\'s offering

##### Day eight (Num. 7:54-59): 

Manasseh\'s offering

##### Day nine (Num. 7:60-65): 

Benjamin\'s offering

##### Day ten (Num. 7:66-71): 

Dan\'s offering

##### Day eleven (Num. 7:72-77): 

Asher\'s offering

##### Day twelve (Num. 7:78-83): 

Naphtali\'s offering

#### The Shekinah of the Tabernacle (Num. 9:15-23): 

When the Tabernacle is set up, the Lord\'s presence (sometimes called
the \"shekinah\") hovers over it as a cloud by day and as fire by night.
When it moves, the people follow; when it stops, the people stop.

#### The silver trumpets of the Tabernacle (Num. 10:1-10): 

Two silver trumpets are to be fashioned for instructing the people. When
both are blown, all the people are to assemble at the entrance of the
Tabernacle. When only one is blown, only the tribal leaders are to
respond.

#### The sons of Aaron at the Tabernacle (Lev. 10:1-20) 

##### Nadab and Abihu: the misconduct (Lev. 10:1-11): 

After offering unholy fire upon the altar (perhaps while drunk),
Nadaband Abihu are consumed by a fire sent by the Lord.

##### Eleazar and Ithamar: the misunderstanding (Lev. 10:12-20): 

Eleazar and Ithamar do not follow the instructions Moses has given them
regarding the sin offering. This angers Moses, but Aaron\'s explanation
of their actions satisfies him.

#### The slander against the God of the Tabernacle (Lev. 24:10-16, 23): 

A man with an Israelite mother and an Egyptian father blasphemes the
Lord. The Lord instructs the Israelites to stone him to death, even
though his father is not an Israelite.

SECTION OUTLINE SIX (NUMBERS 10:11-12:16) 
-----------------------------------------

This outline describes the experiences of the Israelites as they travel
from Mount Sinai to Kadeshbarnea.

### THE SIGNAL FROM THE SKY (Num. 10:11-12): 

\"One day in midspring \[on the twentieth day of the second month\],
during the second year after Israel\'s departure from Egypt, the cloud
lifted from the Tabernacle,\" signaling that it was time once again for
the Israelites to move.

### THE STRIKING OF THE TENTS (Num. 10:13-28): 

The twelve tribes follow the pillar of cloud.

### THE SOLICITATION BY MOSES (Num. 10:29-32): 

Moses attempts to secure the services of his brother-in-law as a guide
through the wilderness.

### THE SECURITY IN THE CLOUD (Num. 10:33-36): 

Each time the Ark is lifted up to follow the cloud, Moses says, \"Arise,
0 LORD, and let your enemies be scattered! Let them flee before you!\"
Each time the cloud stops and the Ark is set down, Moses says, \"Return,
0 LORD, to the countless thousands of Israel!\"

### THE SINS ALONG THE WAY (Num. 11-12) 

#### The defiance and punishment of Israel (Num. 11:1-9, 31-35) 

##### First occasion (Num. 11:1-3): 

Fire falls upon some of the Israelites for complaining bitterly against
God at a place that is later called Taberah.

##### Second occasion (Num. 11:4-9, 31-35): 

Some of the foreigners accompanying Israel begin to complain, \"We
remember all the fish we used to eat for free in Egypt. And we had all
the cucumbers, melons, leeks, onions, and garlic that we wanted. But now
our appetites are gone, and day after day we have nothing to eat but
this manna!\" God sends quail for them to eat, but he also punishes them
with a plague.

#### The despair of Moses (Num. 11: 10-30) 

##### The reason for his complaint (Num. 11:10-15): 

Moses tells God that the burden of leading a rebellious people is too
heavy to bear and he prefers death instead!

##### The results of his complaint (Num. 11:16-30) 

###### The seventy in general (Num. 11:16-25): 

God instructs Moses to summon 70 leaders to the Tabernacle. There God
anoints 70 Israelite elders with his Spirit to assist Moses in leading
the people. The leaders prophesy at this time, but that is the only time
this happens to them.

###### The two in particular (Num. 11:26-30): 

Two of these elders, Eldad and Medad, are absent when the others meet
together, but they begin prophesying in the camp. Moses tells Joshua not
to stop them, saying, \"I wish that all the LORD\'s people were
prophets, and that the LORD would put his Spirit upon them all!\"

##### The disrespect of Miriam and Aaron (Num. 12:1-16) 

###### The reasons for their disrespect (Num. 12:1-3): 

Miriam and Aaron (Moses\' sister and brother) criticize Moses for two
reasons:

####### He has married a Cushite woman. 

####### He has been given greater authority over the Israelites. 

###### The results of their disrespect (Num. 12:4-16): 

God sternly rebukes Miriam and Aaron. Miriam is struck with leprosy.
Aaron begs Moses to pray for their sister, so her leprosy is healed.

SECTION OUTLINE SEVEN (NUMBERS 13-14) The Israelites camp at Kadesh-barnea and send scouts into the Promised Land. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  THE PENETRATION BY THE SCOUTS (Num. 13:1-25) 

#### The names of the men (Num. 13:1-16): 

Twelve men are chosen to scout out the land of Canaan, the Promised
Land. Among them are Caleb from the tribe of Judah and Joshua from the
tribe of Ephraim.

#### The nature of the mission (Num. 13:17-25): 

Moses instructs the scouts to do two things:

##### Find out what the inhabitants are like (Num. 13:17-19) 

##### Bring back samples of the crops grown in the land (Num. 13:20-25). 

### THE LAMENTATION BY THE PEOPLE (Num. 13:26-33-14:10) 

#### The report of the scouts (Num. 13:26-33; 14:6-10) 

##### The faithless report of the ten (Num. 13:26-33): 

\"The people living there are powerful, and their cities and towns are
fortified and very large \.... We even saw giants there, the descendants
of Anak. We felt like grasshoppers next to them, and that\'s what we
looked like to them!\"

##### The faithful report of the two (Num. 14:6-10): 

\"The land we explored is a wonderful land! And if the LORD is pleased
with us, he will bring us safely into that land and give it to us\....
Do not rebel against the LORD, and don\'t be afraid of the people of the
land\.... They have no protection, but the LORD is with us!\"

#### The reaction of the crowd (Num. 14:1-5): 

Upon hearing the report of the ten scouts, the people become worried and
make plans to return to Egypt.

### THE SUPPLICATION (PRAYER) BY THE PROPHET (Num. 14:11-21) 

#### The proposition (Num. 14:11-12): 

The Lord becomes angry with the Israelites and says to Moses, \"I will
disown them and destroy them with a plague. Then I will make you into a
nation far greater and mightier than they are!\"

#### The plea (Num. 14:13-19): 

Moses begs the Lord to pardon Israel, lest the pagans say, \"The LORD
was not able to bring them into the land he swore to give them, so he
killed them in the wilderness.\"

#### The pardon (Num. 14:20-21): 

The Lord forgives his people, although there will still be consequences.

### THE CONDEMNATION BY THE LORD (Num. 14:22-45) 

#### The punishment (Num. 14:22-38): 

The Lord spares the people of Israel from complete destruction as a
nation, but they will still be punished: No one 20 years old or older
(with the exceptions of Caleb and Joshua) will enter the Promised Land.
They will wander in the wilderness for the next 40 years until all of
them die and a new generation is born. The 10 faithless scouts die
immediately from a plague.

#### The presumption (Num. 14:39-45): 

The fickle crowd now decide they want to enter the Promised Land after
all, but they are completely routed by their enemies.

SECTION OUTLINE EIGHT (NUMBERS 15-36) 
-------------------------------------

The Israelites travel from Kadesh-barnea to the eastern bank of the
Jordan River.

### THE TESTIMONY (Num. 15:37-41): 

God commands the people of Israel to make tassels and attach them to the
corners of their garments with blue cord. The tassels will remind them
that they are to be holy just as the Lord is holy.

### THE TABERNACLE INSTRUCTIONS 

#### Concerning the offerings (Num. 15:1-31; 28:1-31; 29:1-40) 

##### The sacrifices (Num. 15:1-13, 17-21; 28:1-31; 29:1-40): 

An overview of the various details to be followed regarding sacrifices.

##### The strangers (Num. 15:14-16): 

Rules concerning foreigners and sacrifices.

##### The sins (Num. 15:22-31) 

###### Sins of ignorance (Num. 15:22-29): 

The course of action to be taken for unintentional sin.

###### Sins of intention (Num. 15:30-31): 

The course of action to be taken for intentional sin.

#### Concerning the Levites (Num. 18:1-32): 

Details relating to their duties and privileges.

#### Concerning vows (Num. 30:1-16): 

Rules governing the making, fulfilling, and nullifying of vows.

### THE TROUBLEMAKERS 

#### The profaner of the Sabbath (Num. 15:32-36): 

A man is stoned to death for disobeying God\'s law by gathering wood on
the Sabbath.

#### The presumptuous Korah (Num. 16:1-50) 

##### Korah\'s accusation (Num. 16:1-3, 13-14): 

Korah and a group of rebellious Israelites accuse Moses of the
following:

###### He is a dictator. 

###### He has brought the Israelites into the wilderness to kill them. 

###### He has been unable to bring them into the Promised Land. 

##### Moses\' answer (Num. 16:4-12, 15-30) 

###### To the rebels (Num. 16:4-12, 15-22): 

Moses tells the rebels to show up the next day at the Tabernacle
entrance with their incense burners. Then the Lord will show them who is
holy and set apart for him.

###### To the rest (Num. 16:23-30): 

Moses warns the people to stay clear of the troublemakers if they want
to continue living.

##### The Lord\'s anger (Num. 16:31-50) 

###### At the ringleaders (Num. 16:31-40): 

The very ground where they are standing opens up and swallows them
alive! Fire blazes from the Lord and burns up Korah\'s followers who are
offering incense.

###### At the rest (Num. 16:41-50) 

####### The rebellion (Num. 16:41-42): 

The next morning people confront Moses and Aaron, saying, \"You two have
killed the LORD\'S people!\"

####### The response (Num. 16:43-46): 

The Lord sends a plague on the people to destroy them.

####### The rescue (Num. 16:47-50): 

Aaron burns incense and makes atonement for the people in order to stop
the plague. Before it stops, 14,700 Israelites die.

#### The people of Edom (Num. 20:14-22): 

The Israelites ask the Edomites if they can pass through their land
quickly and peacefully. The Edomites refuse, despite the fact that they
are descended from Jacob\'s twin brother, Esau.

#### The prophet Balaam (Num. 22:1-24:25): 

King Balak of Moab sees that the Israelites are numerous and powerful,
so he begins to fear for his kingdom. He sends for a prophet named
Balaam to come and curse the Israelites.

##### Balaam\'s foolishness (Num. 22:1-41) 

###### The warning from God (Num. 22:1-21): 

God forbids Balaam to accept a bribe from King Balak of Moab to curse
Israel. However, God does permit the prophet to accompany Balak\'s
messengers to Moab.

###### The wrath of God (Num. 22:22-27): 

En route, Balaam\'s donkey is frightened by something Balaam cannot
see-God\'s angel standing in the road with a drawn sword! Unaware of
this, the angry prophet beats his seemingly unruly animal.

###### The witnesses for God (Num. 22:28-34): 

Balaam is rebuked by his donkey, who complains about its undeserved
beating! Now Balaam sees the angel, who then rebukes him for coming.

###### The words from God (Num. 22:35-41): 

In essence, Balaam is warned to speak only what God tells him to. Upon
arriving in Moab, the prophet relates all this to Balak.

##### Balaam\'s frustration (Num. 23:1-24:25): 

Five times Balaam stands over the people of Israel and is unable to
curse them.

###### First occasion (Num. 23:1-12): 

\"How can I curse those whom God has not cursed? \... I see a people who
live by themselves, set apart from other nations. Who can count Jacob\'s
descendants, as numerous as dust?\"

###### Second occasion (Num. 23:13-24): 

\"God is not a man, that he should lie\.... I received a command to
bless\.... No misfortune is in sight for Jacob\.... God has brought them
out of Egypt\.... No curse can touch Jacob\.... These people rise up
like a lioness.\"

###### Third occasion (Num. 23:25-24:9): 

\"How beautiful are your tents, 0 Jacob \.... \[You are\] like fruitful
gardens by the riverside\.... \[You are\] like cedars beside the
waters\.... \[Your\] kingdom will be exalted\.... Blessed is everyone
who blesses you, 0 Israel.\"

###### Fourth occasion (Num. 24:10-19): 

\"I see him, but not in the present time. I perceive him, but far in the
distant future. A star will rise from Jacob; a scepter will emerge from
Israel. It will crush the foreheads of Moab\'s people.\"

###### Fifth occasion (Num. 24:20-25): 

Balaarn predicts divine judgment on Moab and other pagan nations:
\"Alas, who can survive when God does this?\"

### THE TRAGEDY (Num. 20:2-13) 

#### The disbelief of Israel (Num. 20:2-6): 

When the Israelites run out of water, they blame Moses and lament the
fact that they are not back in Egypt.

#### The directive of God (Num. 20:7-8): 

The Lord tells Moses to assemble the people and command a rock to give
them water.

#### The disobedience of Moses (Num. 20:9-13): 

After the rebellious people are assembled, Moses\' anger causes him to
cry out, \"Must we bring you water from this rock?\" He disobeys the
Lord\'s command and strikes the rock twice. The water still comes out,
but Moses pays a sad price for his disobedience: he cannot lead the
people into the Promised Land.

### THE TRIUMPHS (Num. 21:1-4, 21-35; 31:1-54): 

The Lord gives Israel several victories on their way to the Promised
Land.

#### Over the king of Arad (Num. 21:1-4): 

The Canaanite king of Arad attacks the Israelites and takes some of them
as prisoners. But the Israelites counterattack, and God gives them total
victory.

#### Over King Sihon (Num. 21:21-32): 

King Sihon of the Amorites refuses the Israelites\' peaceful request for
passage and attacks them, but he suffers total destruction.

#### Over King Og (Num. 21:33-35): 

This giant warrior king of Bashan (Deut. 3:11) is killed by the
Israelites, along with his sons and his entire army.

#### Over five Midianite kings (Num. 31:1-54) 

##### The battle (Num. 31:1-12): 

Twelve thousand crack Israelite soldiers (1,000 from each tribe) are
chosen to battle the Midianites. All five Midianite kings are killed,
along with the prophet Balaam.

##### The bungling (Num. 31:13-24): 

Moses is angry with the army officers for sparing some Midianite women
who had previously sexually seduced many Israelite men.

##### The booty (Num. 31:25-54): 

At God\'s command, half of the war spoils are kept by the soldiers and
half are given to the people. This includes 675,000 sheep, 72,000
cattle, 61,000 donkeys, and 32,000 young girls.

### THE TRANSITIONS (Num. 20:1, 23-29; 27:12-23) 

#### Two deaths (Num. 20:1, 23-25, 28-29) 

##### Miriam, Moses\' sister (Num. 20:1): 

Miriam dies and is buried in the wilderness of Zin, near Kadesh.

##### Aaron, Moses\' brother (Num. 20:23-25, 28-29) 

###### The preparation for his death (Num. 20:23-25): 

Moses is commanded to take Aaron and Eleazar (Aaron\'s son) up on Mount
Hor and there transfer the clothing (and office) of Israel\'s high
priest from father to son.

###### The place of his death (Num. 20:28-29): 

Aaron dies and is buried on Mount Hor. The people then mourn for Aaron
for 30 days.

#### Two designations (Num. 20:26-28; 27:12-23) 

##### Eleazar succeeds Aaron (Num. 20:26-28): 

Eleazar now becomes Israel\'s second high priest.

##### Joshua succeeds Moses (Num. 27:12-23) 

###### The command (Num. 27:12-14): 

Moses is to climb a mountain and view the Promised Land, for he must
soon die.

###### The ceremony (Num. 27:15-23): 

Joshua is appointed as Israel\'s new leader. In a public ceremony Moses
lays hands on Joshua and passes the torch of leadership to him.

### THE TRANSGRESSIONS (Num. 25:1-18) 

#### The sin of the crowd (Num. 25:1-5, 9) 

##### Their perversion (Num. 25:1-3): 

Shortly after the Balaam incident, many Israelite men engage in sexual
immorality with Moabite women. Then they commit idolatry by bowing to
their pagan gods.

##### Their punishment (Num. 25:4-5, 9): 

All involved are executed, resulting in the deaths of 24,000 people.

#### The sin of a couple (Num. 25:6-8, 10-18) 

##### Their perversion (Num. 25:6, 14-15): 

Despite the punishment that has just occurred, an Israelite man brings a
Midianite woman into the camp in full view of Moses.

##### Their punishment (Num. 25:7-8, 10-13, 16-18): 

In righteous indignation, Phinehas, son of Eleazar, enters the couple\'s
tent and kills them with his spear.

### THE TABULATIONS (SECOND CENSUS) (Num. 26:1-65): 

\"Take a census of all the men of Israel who are 20 years old or older,
to find out how many of each family are of military age.\"

#### The reason for the census (Num. 26:52-56): 

The amount of land allotted is determined by the size of the tribe.

#### The results of the census (Num. 26:5-51, 57-62) 

##### Reuben (Num. 26:5-11): 43,730 

##### Simeon (Num. 26:12-14): 22,200 

##### Gad (Num. 26:15-18): 40,500 

##### Judah (Num. 26:19-22): 76,500 

##### Issachar (Num. 26:23-25): 64,300 

##### Zebulun (Num. 26:26-27): 60,500 

##### Manasseh (Num. 26:28-34): 52,700 

##### Ephraim (Num. 26:35-37): 32,500 

##### Benjamin (Num. 26:38-41): 45,600 

##### Dan (Num. 26:42-43): 64,400 

##### Asher (Num. 26:44-47): 53,400 

##### Naphtali (Num. 26:48-50): 45,400 

##### Levi (Num. 26:57-62): 23,000 

##### Total (not counting the tribe of Levi) (Num. 26:51): 601,730 

### THE TRAVELS (Num. 21:10-20; 33:1-49) 

#### A partial listing of Israel\'s stops (Num. 21:10-20): 

Nine stops are recorded. During one stop Israel sings praise to God for
providing their water.

#### A perfect (complete) listing of Israel\'s stops (Num. 33:1-49): 

Many geographical locations are listed, beginning with Rameses in Egypt
to the plains of Moab just east of the Jordan River.

### THE TYPES (Num. 17:1-13; 19:1-22; 21:4-9; 32:1-42; 35:6-34): 

Many scholars see symbolic representations, or \"types,\" in many of the
images found in the book of Numbers.

#### Types of Christ (Num. 17:1-13; 19:1-22; 21:5-9; 35:6-34) 

##### The death of Christ (Num. 19:1-22; 21:5-9) 

###### The red heifer (Num. 19:1-22): 

A blemish-free red heifer is to be killed and its blood sprinkled seven
times toward the Tabernacle. The carcass is then to be burned, mixed
with cedarwood, hyssop, and scarlet thread. The ashes are to be used for
purification.

###### The brass serpent (Num. 21:5-9): 

Poisonous snakes are sent to punish rebellious Israel. In response to
the people\'s prayer for forgiveness, God instructs Moses: \"Make a
replica of a poisonous snake and attach it to the top of a pole. Those
who are bitten will live if they simply look at it!\"

##### The resurrection of Christ (Num. 17:1-13): 

Aaron\'s rod has also been seen as a type of Christ\'s resurrection.

###### God\'s message (Num. 17:1-5): 

Responding to a challenge to Aaron\'s leadership, God orders Aaron and
each of Israel\'s tribal leaders to place their staffs in the
Tabernacle.

###### God\'s miracle (Num. 17:6-13): 

The next day only Aaron\'s staff has budded, is blossoming, and has ripe
almonds hanging from it!

##### The security in Christ (Num. 35:6-34): 

Six cities, three on the west of the Jordan River and three on the east,
are designated as refuges for those who have accidentally killed
someone. These people can safely enter and be protected from any of the
victim\'s relatives who seek revenge.

#### A type of worldly believer (Num. 32:1-42): 

The three tribes east of the Jordan River have been compared to worldly
believers today.

##### The request (Num. 32:1-5): 

The tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh seek
permission from Moses to live on the eastern side of the Jordan River.

##### The reprimand (Num. 32:6-15): 

Moses asks, \"Do you mean you want to stay back here while your brothers
go across and do all the fighting? \... Are you trying to discourage the
rest of the people of Israel from going across to the land the LORD has
given them?\"

##### The reassurance (Num. 32:16-32): 

The 2 tribes solemnly promise to fully support the other 9½ tribes in
conquering Canaan.

##### The results (Num. 32:33-42): 

Moses grants their request.

### THE TERRITORY (Num. 33:50-35:5) 

#### Purging the land (Num. 33:50-56): 

Israel is commanded to invade Canaan, drive out its inhabitants, destroy
the idols, and settle the land.

#### Partitioning the land (Num. 34:1-35:5) 

##### Areas assigned to the regular tribes (Num. 34:1-29): 

The borders of the Promised Land are Kadesh-barnea in the south, the
Mediterranean Sea in the west, Mount Hor in the north, and the Jordan
River in the east. The 2½ tribes will live just east of the Jordan
River.

##### Areas assigned to the religious tribe (Num. 35:1-5): 

The tribe of Levi is to be given 48 cities throughout the land.

### THE TENACITY (Num. 27:1-11; 36:1-13) 

#### The request (Num. 27:1-11): 

Inasmuch as their dead father had no sons, the five daughters of
Zelophehad request that they be allowed to inherit his land. The Lord
instructs Moses to grant this request, but with one qualification.

#### The restriction (Num. 36:1-13): 

In order to inherit the land, the daughters must marry men within their
tribe of Manasseh, which they do.

PART THREE: GOD\'S DELIVERANCE OF ISRAEL---THE REVIEW (Deuteronomy 1-34) 
========================================================================

This part covers the section of Deuteronomy consisting mostly of four
sermons that review and summarize the history and laws of Israel. Moses
delivers these sermons to the Israelites as they are about to enter the
Promised Land.

SECTION OUTLINE NINE (DEUTERONOMY 1-4) 
--------------------------------------

Moses delivers his first sermon to the Israelites.

### AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL AT MOUNT SINAI (Deut. 11 -18) 

#### The area promised by the Lord (Deut. 1:7-8): 

The Lord gives the Israelites all the land from the Negev to the
Euphrates River.

#### The administrators picked by Moses (Deut. 1:9-18): 

Moses recounts the selection of the 70 elders (see Num. 11:14-17).

### AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL AT KADESH-BARNEA (Deut. 1:19-46) A. The route of the spies (Deut. 1:19-25): See Num. 13:1-17. 

#### The rebellion of the crowd (Deut. 1:26-33): See Num. 14:1-4. 

#### The retribution by the Lord (Deut. 1:34-46): See Num. 14:26-38. 

### AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL EN ROUTE TO THE JORDAN RIVER (Deut.2:1-3:29): 

Moses recounts how the Lord finally said to him \"You have been
wandering around in this hill country long enough; turn northward.\"

#### The three friends (peaceful nations) (Deut. 2:4-23): 

Moses reviews how the Lord commanded the Israelites not to seize the
land of three nations.

##### Seir (Deut. 2:4-8): 

\"Don\'t bother them, for I have given them all the hill country around
Mount Seir as their property, and I will not give you any of their
land.\"

##### Moab (Deut. 2:9-15): 

\"Do not bother the Moabites, the descendants of Lot, or start a war
with them. I have given them Ar as their property, and I will not give
you any of their land.\"

##### Ammon (Deut. 2:16-23): 

\"Do not bother the Ammonites, the descendants of Lot, or start a war
with them. I have given the land of Ammon to them as their property, and
I will not give you any of their land.\"

#### The two foes (enemy nations) (Deut. 2:24-3:11): 

Moses reviews how the Lord commanded the Israelites to attack two other
nations.

##### King Sihon of Heshbon (Deut. 2:24-37): 

Moses reviews Israel\'s victory over this king.

##### King Og of Bashan (Deut. 3:1-11): 

Moses reviews Israel\'s victory over this huge giant, whose iron bed
measured 13 feet long by 6 feet wide!

#### The two favors (Deut. 3:12-29) 

##### The request of the 2 ½ tribes (Deut. 3:12-22): 

Moses reviews how he granted the request of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh to
settle on the eastern side of the Jordan River.

##### The request of Moses (Deut. 3:23-29): 

Moses reviews how the Lord refused his request that he be allowed to
enter the Promised Land.

#### AN OVERVIEW OF ISRAEL\'S RELATIONSHIP WITH THE LORD (Deut. 4:1-49) 

##### The God of Israel (Deut. 4:1-19, 24, 31-40): 

Israel is commanded to worship God and God alone, to keep his laws, and
to be careful not to add to or subtract from his laws.

##### The Israel of God (Deut. 4:20-23, 25-30): 

Israel is commanded to remember that they belong to the Lord and that
they will be punished if they stray from him.

##### The Law of Moses (Deut. 4:41-49): 

Some final instructions are given by Moses, and the law that follows in
the next several chapters is introduced.

SECTION OUTLINE TEN (DEUTERONOMY 5-26) 
--------------------------------------

Moses delivers his second sermon to the Israelites.

### CONCERNING THE MORAL LAW: 

Moses reviews and expands upon the laws the Lord had given the
Israelites regarding morality.

#### The covenant (Deut. 5:1-5): 

Moses reviews the covenant God made with Israel at Mount Sinai (see Ex.
19:5).

#### The commandments (Deut. 5:6-22; 6:1-9, 20-25) 

##### The record (Deut. 5:6-22; 6:1-5): 

Moses reviews the Ten Commandments as originally given in Exodus 20 with
the addition of the \"Hear, 0 Israel! The LORD is our God, the LORD
alone. And you must love the LORD your God with all your heart, all your
soul, and all your strength.\"

##### The responsibilities (Deut. 6:6-9, 20-25): 

Moses tells the people that they must teach the commandments to their
children and remind them of their rescue from Egypt.

#### The chosen (nation) (Deut. 7:6-11; 9:1-6; 10:12-22): 

Moses reminds the Israelites that God\'s love for them is based on his
grace, not their goodness. How is Israel to respond? \"What does the
LORD your God require of you? He requires you to fear him, to live
according to his will, to love and worship him with all your heart and
soul, and to obey the LORD\'s commands and laws that I am giving you
today for your own good.\"

#### The circumstances (Deut. 5:23-33; 9:7-10:5) 

##### The reception of the law (Deut. 5:23-33): 

Moses recounts how the people responded to the Lord\'s awesome presence
on Mount Sinai (see Ex. 19:9-25).

##### The rejection of the law (Deut. 9:7-29): 

Moses recounts several occasions when the people rebelled against the
Lord\'s commands.

###### At Mount Sinai (Deut. 9:7-21): 

Here Israel worshiped the golden calf, which led Moses to smash the two
stone tablets containing the Ten Commandments (see Ex. 32).

###### In the wilderness (Deut. 9:22-29): 

At Taberah, Massah, and Kibroth-hattaavah, Israel refused to enter the
Promised Land (see Num. 13-14).

##### The replacement of the law (Deut. 10:1-5): 

Moses recounts how two new tablets containing the Ten Commandments were
made to replace the tablets that were dashed to the ground.

#### The choices (Deut. 10:6-9): 

Moses recounts the selection of Eleazar (Aaron\'s son) as high priest
(see Num. 20:23-29) and of the tribe of Levi as ministers before the
Lord (see Ex. 32:25-29).

#### The confidence (Deut. 7:12-24; 11:22-32): 

Moses assures the Israelites that obedience to the Lord\'s commands
brings blessing, wealth, health, and victory over enemies.

#### The caution (Deut. 6:10-19; 7:1-5, 25-26; 8:11-20; 11:16-17): 

Moses warns the Israelites to fear the Lord, to worship and obey him
only, and to remember his faithfulness. He also directs them to destroy
their enemies and the pagan idols of the land.

#### The country (Deut. 8:7-10; 11:8-15): 

Moses tells the people that Canaan is a land of abundant water and lush
lands of wheat, barley, vines, figs, pomegranates, olives, and honey.
The land also contains rich stores of iron and copper.

#### The compassion (Deut. 8:1-6; 10:10-11; 11:1-7): 

Moses recalls the Lord\'s great faithfulness and compassion toward the
Israelites during their wilderness wanderings.

### CONCERNING THE SOCIAL LAW: 

Moses reviews and expands on the laws that the Lord had given the
Israelites regarding society. Following is an alphabetical topical list
of these laws.

#### Animals (Deut. 22:6-7; 25:4): 

Don\'t take a mother bird from its nest. Don\'t muzzle an ox while it is
treading out the grain.

#### Building (Deut. 22:8): 

Every new house must have a guardrail around the roof to prevent someone
from falling.

#### Clothing (Deut. 22:5, 11-12): 

Clothing is not to be made from both linen and wool. Women are forbidden
to wear men\'s clothing, and men are forbidden to wear women\'s
clothing.

The Israelites are to wear tassels on the four corners of their cloaks.

#### Dietary laws (Deut. 14:3-21; 15:19-20, 22-23): 

The Israelites are to regard certain animals as clean and others as
unclean. They are not to eat the unclean animals.

#### Divorce (Deut. 24:1-4): 

There are rules governing both divorce and remarriage.

#### Domestic situations (Deut. 21:10-17; 22:13-30; 24:5; 25:5-12) 

##### Captive wife (Deut. 21:10-14): 

There are rules regarding the treatment and rights of a captive woman
who is taken as a wife.

##### Multiple wives (Deut. 21:15-17): 

There are rules governing how an inheritance is to be divided among the
children of multiple wives.

##### Suspect wife (Deut. 22:13-30): 

There are rules governing various issues related to sexual purity and
faithfulness.

##### New wife (Deut. 24:5): 

A man is not to be drafted during his first year of marriage, so he can
be home with his new wife.

##### Widowed wife (Deut. 25:5-10): 

The brother of a deceased man must agree to care for his brother\'s
widow or be disgraced in the community.

##### Inappropriate wife (Deut. 25:11-12): 

She will be punished for wrongly aiding her husband in a fight with
another man.

#### Guilt (Deut. 24:16): 

Parents should not be put to death for the sins of their children, or
children for the sins of their parents.

#### Honesty (Deut. 25:13-16): 

Always use accurate scales.

#### Hygiene (Deut. 23:9-14): 

There are rules governing personal sanitation.

#### Idolatry (Deut. 13:1-14:2; 16:21-22; 17:2-7; 18:9-14, 20-22):

The practice of idolatry is strictly forbidden.

##### The prophets (Deut. 13:1-18; 18:20-22): 

Prophets who encourage people to worship pagan gods are to be stoned to
death.

##### The perversions (Deut. 14:1-2; 16:21-22; 17:2-7; 18:9-14): 

The Israelites are forbidden to engage in pagan and idolatrous
practices.

#### Inquests (Deut. 21:1-9): 

If a murder victim is found and the crime cannot be solved, the leaders
of the nearest city are to sacrifice a young cow and pray: \"Our hands
did not shed this blood, nor did we see it happen. 0 LORD, forgive your
people Israel whom you have redeemed. Do not charge your people Israel
with the guilt of murdering an innocent person.\"

#### Judges (Deut. 16:18-20; 17:8-13; 19:15-21; 25:1-3): 

Various laws are given to ensure just verdicts and punishments.

#### Juvenile delinquency (Deut. 21:18-23): 

A stubborn and rebellious son who constantly refuses to obey his parents
must be stoned to death.

#### Kings (Deut. 17:14-20): 

Five rules are given concerning Israel\'s future kings:

##### He must be an Israelite and not a foreigner (Deut. 17:15). 

##### He must not acquire great numbers of horses (Deut. 17:16). 

##### He must not take many wives (Deut. 17:17). 

##### He must not accumulate large amounts of silver and gold (Deut. 17:17). 

##### He must read and obey the law of God daily (Deut. 17:19-20). 

#### Laborers (Deut. 24:14-15): 

Never take advantage of poor laborers. Pay them their wages each day
before sunset.

#### Landmarks (Deut. 19:14): 

Do not move your neighbor\'s boundary stone.

#### Leprosy (Deut. 24:8-9): 

Israel was to carefully observe the instructions concerning leprosy (see
Lev. 13-14).

They were also to remember how God cursed Miriam with leprosy (see Num.
12:115).

#### Neighbors (Deut. 22:1-4; 23:24-25): 

If you see someone\'s ox or sheep wandering away, return it. You may eat
of the fruit from someone\'s vineyard or grainfield, but do not abuse
this privilege.

#### Planting (Deut. 22:9-10): 

Don\'t plant two kinds of seed in your vineyard. Don\'t plow with an ox
and donkey yoked together.

#### Pledges (Deut. 24:6, 10-13, 17-18): 

There are rules governing what may be received as security for a loan.

#### Prostitution (Deut. 23:17-18): 

Both male and female prostitution is forbidden.

#### Retribution (Deut. 25:17-19): 

The Israelites are commanded to wipe out the Amalekites for their cruel
acts against them.

#### Servants (Deut. 15:12-18; 23:15-16; 24:7): 

There are various rules governing the treatment of servants.

#### Tithes (Deut. 14:22-29; 26:12-15): 

All Israelites are to tithe their crops each year, bringing the revenue
to the Tabernacle. They also are expected to help support the Levites,
foreigners, widows, and orphans living in their town or city.

#### Usury (Deut. 23:19-20): 

One can charge interest to a foreigner but not to a fellow Israelite.

#### Vows (Deut. 23:21-23): 

Vows to the Lord must be promptly fulfilled, although it is not a sin to
refrain from making a vow.

#### Warfare (Deut. 20:1-20): 

Instructions are given regarding the preparation for and practice of
warfare. Four types of individuals are exempted from going to battle:

##### One who has just built a new home (Deut. 20:5) 

##### One who has just planted a vineyard (Deut. 20:6) 

##### One who has just become engaged (Deut. 20:7) 

##### One who is terrified (Deut. 20:8) 

#### Welfare (Deut. 24:19-22): 

Leave a portion of your crops behind for foreigners, widows, and orphans
to glean.

### CONCERNING THE RELIGIOUS LAW: 

Moses reviews and expands upon the laws that the Lord had given the
Israelites regarding religious and ceremonial practices. Following is an
alphabetical topical list of these laws.

#### Central sanctuary (Deut. 12:1-32; 23:1-8): 

Laws are given regarding the Tabernacle.

##### The place (Deut. 12:1-32): 

\"You must seek the LORD your God at the place he himself will choose
from among all the tribes for his name to be honored. There you will
bring to the LORD your burnt offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes,
your special gifts, your offerings to fulfill a vow, your freewill
offerings, and your offerings of the firstborn animals of your flocks
and herds.\" The final, permanent location for the Tabernacle is later
revealed to be Jerusalem.

##### The prohibitions (Deut. 23:1-8): 

Four kinds of individuals are prohibited from entering the Tabernacle:

###### An emasculated person (Deut. 23:1) 

###### A person of illegitimate birth (Deut. 23:2) 

###### An Ammonite (Deut. 23:3) 

###### A Moabite (Deut. 23:3) 

#### Cities of refuge (Deut. 19:1-13): 

Moses reviews the purpose for these cities (see Num. 35:9-34).

#### Festivals (Deut. 16:1-17; 26:1-11) 

##### The overview (Deut. 16:1-15; 26:1-11): 

Various instructions are given regard the following festivals:

###### Passover/Festival of Unleavened Bread (Deut. 16:1-8) (see also Lev. 23:5-8) 

###### Festival of Harvest (Deut. 16:9-12) (see also Lev. 23:15-22) 

###### Festival of Shelters (Deut. 16:13-15) (see also Lev. 23:33-43) 

###### Festival of Firstfruits (Deut. 26:1-11) (see also Lev. 23:9-14) 

##### The obligations (Deut. 16:16-17): 

All Israelite men are required to attend the following three festivals
each year:

###### Passover/Festival of Unleavened Bread 

###### Festival of Harvest 

###### Festival of Shelters 

#### The prophet (Deut. 18:15-19): 

Moses tells the people that the Lord will send them a prophet who will
speak for him and whom everyone must obey. The New Testament makes it
clear that Jesus was the ultimate fulfillment of this promise (see John
6:14).

#### Israel (Deut. 26:16-19): 

Moses reviews Israel\'s responsibilities before the Lord. They are to
obey his commandments and be a holy people. In return, the Lord will
elevate them above all the other nations.

#### Levites (Deut. 18:1-8): 

Moses reviews the Levites\' privileges and responsibilities.

#### Offerings (Deut. 15:21; 17:1): 

No lame, blind, sick, or blemished animal will be accepted by God as a
sacrifice.

#### Sabbath year (Deut. 15:1-15): 

All debts are to be canceled at the end of every seventh year. All
slaves who are Israelites are to be released at the end of every seventh
year as well.

SECTION OUTLINE ELEVEN (DEUTERONOMY 27-28) 
------------------------------------------

Moses delivers his third sermon to the Israelites.

### THE COMMAND TO BUILD (Deut. 27:1-8): 

Israel is to construct an altar on Mount Ebal and write the laws of God
on it.

### THE COMMAND TO BROADCAST (Deut. 27:9-28:68): 

Six tribes (Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin) are to
stand on Mount Gerizim and proclaim a blessing over the Israelites (for
obeying the law). Then the other six tribes (Reuben, Gad, Asher,
Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali) are to stand on Mount Ebal and proclaim a
curse (for disobeying the law).

#### The curses for disobedience (Deut. 27:14-26; 28:15-68) 

##### The reasons (Deut. 27:14-26): 

The Levites are to proclaim a curse on the following people:

###### those who make idols (Deut. 27:15) 

###### those who despise their parents (Deut. 27:16) 

###### those who move boundary markers (Deut. 27:17) 

###### those who lead the blind astray (Deut. 27:18) 

###### those who are unjust to foreigners, orphans, or widows (Deut. 27:19) 

###### those who commit incest of various sorts (Deut. 27:20, 22-23) 

###### those who practice bestiality (Deut. 27:21) 

###### those who commit murder or accept payment to do so (Deut. 27:24-25) 

###### those who do not obey the law (Deut. 27:26) 

##### The results (Deut. 28:15-68): 

If the people do not obey the laws that the Lord gives them, they will
experience curses.

###### Destruction in the land (Deut. 28:15-24, 26-31, 33-35, 38-48): 

Disobedience will result in diseases, plagues, famine, drought, dust
storms, defeat in war, infertility, constant fear and frustration, and
the enslavement of their children.

###### Dispersion from the land (Deut. 28:25, 32, 36-37, 48-68): 

Disobedience will also cause the Israelites to be surrounded by their
enemies, reduced to cannibalism, removed from the land, enslaved, and
dispersed among the nations. They will become a proverb and an object of
horror and mockery among the nations, and they will find no rest there.
The Lord will cause them to tremble and despair. They will live in
constant fear, with no reason to believe that they will survive.

#### The blessings for obedience (Deut. 28:1-14): 

If the Israelites heed God\'s laws, they will experience blessings in
their towns and in the country. They will have many children, ample
crops, and large flocks and herds. They will have victory in war and
lend to many nations, borrowing from none. They will be the head and not
the tail.

SECTION OUTLINE TWELVE (DEUTERONOMY 29-30) 
------------------------------------------

Moses delivers his fourth and final sermon to the Israelites as they are
about to enter the Promised Land.

### THE COVENANT (Deut. 29:1-29): 

Moses reminds the Israelites of the Lord\'s covenant with them and urges
them to obey its laws so that they will not experience its curses.

### THE CHANGE (Deut. 30:1-10): 

Moses tells the people that the Lord will change their hearts while they
are in captivity, and they will love the Lord wholeheartedly. The Lord
will then gather them together once again and restore them to their
land. He will bless them and make them more prosperous than ever.

### THE CHOICE (Deut. 30:11-20): 

\"Today I have given you the choice between life and death, between
blessings and curses. I call on heaven and earth to witness the choice
you make. Oh, that you would choose life, that you and your descendants
might live! Choose to love the LORD your God and to obey him and commit
yourself to him, for he is your life.\"

SECTION OUTLINE THIRTEEN (DEUTERONOMY 31-34) 
--------------------------------------------

Moses gives his parting instructions and prepares to pass on the
responsibilities of leadership to Joshua. Moses dies on Mount Nebo.

### THE SETTING APART (Deut. 31:1-8, 14-15, 23): 

Before all the people, Moses commissions Joshua as their new leader,
commanding him to be courageous, for he \"will lead these people into
the land that the LORD swore to give their ancestors.\"

### THE SCRIPTURES (Deut. 31:9-13, 24-27): 

Moses finishes writing the law and instructs the Israelites to read it
every seventh year at the Festival of Shelters. This is so the people
will always know the law, and it will stand as a witness against their
sins.

### THE SONG (Deut. 31:16-22, 28-30; 32:1-47) 

#### The crisis (Deut. 31:16-22, 28-30) 

##### The Lord tells Moses (Deut. 31:16-22): 

The Lord reveals that his people will eventually rebel against him after
Moses\' death and that he will severely punish them for their sins.

##### Moses tells Israel (Deut. 31:28-30): 

\"I know that after my death you will become utterly corrupt and will
turn from the path I have commanded you to follow. In the days to come,
disaster will come down on you, for you will make the LORD very angry by
doing what is evil in his sight.\"

#### The contents (Deut. 32:1-43) 

##### The greatness of God (Deut. 32:1-4, 39-42): 

The Lord is Israel\'s perfect, just, and faithful Rock! He is the only
God, able to kill and to give life, to wound and to heal.

##### The grace of God (Deut. 32:5-14, 43): 

\"Jacob is \[the Lord\'s\] special possession. He found them in a desert
land, in an empty, howling wasteland. He surrounded them and watched
over them; he guarded them as his most precious possession.\"

##### The grief of God (Deut. 32:15-38) 

###### What Israel has done (Deut. 32:15-18, 28-29): 

They have rejected and abandoned God for the gods of the pagan nations.

###### What the Lord will do (Deut. 32:19-27, 30-38): 

The Lord will hide his face from them, bring calamities upon them, and
scatter them among the nations. He will bless the Gentiles.

#### The challenge (Deut. 32:44-47): 

Moses commands the Israelites: \"Take to heart all the words I have
given you today. Pass them on as a command to your children so they will
obey every word of this law. These instructions are not mere words-they
are your life! By obeying them you will enjoy a long life in the land
you are crossing the Jordan River to occupy.\"

### THE SUMMONS (Deut. 32:48-52): 

God instructs Moses to climb Mount Nebo and gaze westward upon the
Promised Land before he dies there on the mountain.

### THE SUMMATION (Deut. 33:1-29): 

Moses blesses each of the tribes before he dies, summarizing what will
happen to each of them in the future.

#### Reuben (Deut. 33:6): 

\"Let the tribe of Reuben live and not die out, even though their tribe
is small.\"

#### Judah (Deut. 33:7): 

\"Give them strength to defend their cause; help them against their
enemies!\"

#### Levi (Deut. 33:8-11): 

\"Now let them teach your regulations to Jacob\.... They will present
incense before you and offer whole burnt offerings on the altar.\"

#### Benjamin (Deut. 33:12): 

\"The people of Benjamin are loved by the LORD and live in safety beside
him.\"

#### Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) (Deut. 33:13-17): 

\"May their land be blessed by the LORD with the choice gift of rain
from the heavens \... with the finest crops of the ancient mountains.\"

#### Zebulun (Deut. 33:18-19): 

\"May the people of Zebulun prosper in their expeditions abroad.\"

#### Issachar (Deut. 33:18-19): 

\"May the people of Issachar prosper at home in their tents.\"

#### Gad (Deut. 33:20-21): 

\"Blessed is the one who enlarges Gad\'s territory!\" I. Dan (Deut.
33:22): \"Dan is a lion\'s cub, leaping out from Bashan.\"

#### Naphtali (Deut. 33:23): 

\"You are rich in favor and full of the LORD\'s blessings; may you
possess the west and the south.\"

#### Asher (Deut. 33:24-25): 

\"May he be esteemed by his brothers; may he bathe his feet in olive
oil. May the bolts of your gates be of iron and bronze; may your
strength match the length of your days!\"

### THE SIGHT (Deut. 34:1-4): 

On Mount Nebo the Lord shows Moses the entire Promised Land.

### THE SEPARATION (Deut. 34:5-9): 

Moses dies on Mount Nebo.

#### The location of his grave (Deut. 34:5-6): 

\"\[Moses\] was buried in a valley near Beth-peor in Moab, but to this
day no one knows the exact place.\"

#### The length of his life (Deut. 34:7): 

\"Moses was 120 years old when he died, yet his eyesight was clear, and
he was as strong as ever.\"

#### The lamentation over his death (Deut. 34:8): 

\"The people of Israel mourned thirty days for Moses on the plains of
Moab, until the customary period of mourning was over.\"

#### The leader in his place (Deut. 34:9): 

Joshua son of Nun officially assumes the leadership role that had
belonged to Moses.

### THE SAINT (Deut. 34:10-12): 

\"There has never been another prophet like Moses, whom the LORD knew
face to face.\"
