THE PATRIARCHS (12-50) 
======================

This second part of Genesis describes four great heroes: Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and Joseph.

Abraham - GENESIS 12:1-25:18
----------------------------

This section covers the life of Abraham.

### THE CONVERSION AND CALLING OF ABRAM (12:1-5) 

####  The place (12:1): 

Ur of the Chaldeans (see Genesis 11:31).

#### The promises (12:2-3): 

Abram will found a great nation; and God will bless him, make his name
great, and cause him to bless others. Those who bless Abram will be
blessed; those who curse him will be cursed. Everyone on earth will be
blessed through him. This takes place through Jesus Christ, a descendant
of Abram.

#### The pilgrimage (12:4-5): 

Abram travels from Ur to Haran and from Haran to Canaan.

### THE CANAAN OF ABRAM (12:6-9) 

#### Abram at Shechem (12:6-7):

The Lord promises to give Canaan to Abram, and Abram builds an altar
there.

#### Abram at Bethel (12:8-9): 

Abram builds another altar.

### THE CARNALITY OF ABRAM (FIRST OCCASION) (12:10-20) 

#### The famine (12:10): 

Abram goes from Canaan to Egypt to escape a famine.

#### The falsehood (12:11-13): 

Afraid for his life, Abram tells Sarai to pretend she is his sister.

#### The favor (12:14-16): 

Pharaoh rewards Abram with riches for Sarai\'s sake, probably intending
to marry her.

#### The frustration (12:17): 

God plagues Pharaoh and his household for his plans to marry Sarai.

#### The fury (12:18-20): 

Pharaoh rebukes Abram for his deceit and sends him and Sarai away.

### THE CONDESCENSION OF ABRAM (13:1-18) 

#### The arrival (13:1-4): 

Abram arrives at Bethel and worships God again.

#### The argument (13:5-7): 

The herdsmen of Abram and Lot (his nephew) have a dispute over grazing
rights.

#### The agreement (13:8-13) 

##### The terms (13:8-9): 

Abram allows Lot to select his own land.

##### The tragedy (13:10-13): 

Lot foolishly chooses land close to the morally perverted city of Sodom.

#### The assurance (13:14-18): 

After Lot\'s departure, God again promises to make Abram\'s descendants
as numerous as the dust of the earth and to give them the land of
Canaan.

### THE COURAGE OF ABRAM (14:1-16) 

#### The villains (14:1-11) 

##### The rebellion (14:1-4): 

Five Canaanite city-states rebel against Kedorlaomer of Elam.

##### The retaliation (14:5-11):

Kedorlaomer and his allies defeat the armies of the five city-states,
plunder their cities, and carry many people away as slaves.

#### The victim (14:12): 

Lot, now living in Sodom, is taken away as a sIave.

#### The victory (14:13-16) 

##### Abram\'s army (14:13-14): 

Upon learning of Lot\'s capture, Abram and his 318 trained servants ride
out to rescue Lot.

##### Abram\'s attack (14:15): 

Abram divides his men and initiates a surprise attack at night.

##### Abram\'s achievements (14:16): 

Kedorlaomer is defeated, and Lot is rescued.

### THE COMMUNION OF ABRAM (14:17-24) 

#### The godly and priestly king of Salem (14:17-20): 

As he is returning from battle to his home in Hebron, Abram meets
Melchizedek, who blesses him. Abram offers him a tenth of all the goods
he has recovered from Kedorlaomer.

#### The godless and perverted king of Sodom (14:21-24): 

In stark contrast, Abram refuses to have any fellowship with Bera, king
of wicked Sodom.

### THE COVENANT WITH ABRAM (15:1-21) 

#### Abram\'s faulty assumption (15:1-3): 

Abram complains that upon his death all his goods will be passed on to
Eliezer, one of his servants from Damascus. Eliezer will then become the
heir to the covenant.

#### God\'s faithful assurance (15:4-21) 

##### The revelation (15:4-5): 

God tells Abram that the promised heir will be Abram\'s own son and that
Abram\'s descendants will be as numerous as the stars in the heavens!

##### The response (15:6): 

\"And Abram believed the LORD, and the LORD declared him righteous
because of his faith.\"

##### The ratification (15:7-17) 

###### The details (15:7-11): 

God ratifies his promise to Abram with a covenant sealed by blood.

###### The dream (15:12): 

At sunset Abram falls into a deep sleep and sees troubling visions.

###### The destiny (of Israel) (15:13-16): 

God speaks to Abram in his sleep, telling him his descendants will be
enslaved for four hundred years. God also tells him that the oppressors
will be punished, and that Abram\'s descendants will be set free and
depart with great riches.

###### The descent (of God himself) (15:17): 

A smoking firepot and a flaming torch, probably symbolizing God himself,
pass between the dead animals of the blood covenant.

##### The real estate (15:18-21): 

God reveals to Abram the boundaries of the Promised Land, from the
border of Egypt to the Euphrates River.

### THE COMPROMISE BY ABRAM (16:1-16) 

#### The rationale for his compromise (16:1-3) 

##### The problem (16:1):

Sarai is still unable to bear a son.

##### The plan (16:1-3):

Sarai convinces Abram to marry Hagar, her servant, in order to have a
son through her.

#### The results of his compromise (16:4-16) 

##### Hagar\'s marriage to Abram (16:4): 

After Hagar conceives, she begins to look down upon Sarai.

##### Hagar\'s mistreatment by Sarai (16:5-6): 

After suffering harsh treatment from the frustrated Sarai, Hagar flees
into the desert.

##### Hagar\'s meeting with the Lord (16:7-14) 

###### The Lord advises her (16:7-9): 

The angel of the Lord comes to her by a well and tells her, \"Return to
\[Sarai\] and submit to her authority.\"

###### The Lord assures her (16:10-14):

The angel of the Lord tells Hagar that she will have innumerable
descendants through her unborn son, who will be called Ishmael (\"God
hears\").

##### Hagar\'s mothering of Ishmael (16:15-16):

She gives birth to Ishmael when Abram is eighty-six years old.

### THE CIRCUMCISION OF ABRAHAM (17:1-27) 

#### God and Abram (17:1-14) 

##### Abram\'s new title (17:1-8):

God changes Abram\'s name from Abram (\"exalted father\") to Abraham
(\"father of many\").

##### Abraham\'s new task (17:9-14) 

###### The particulars (17:9-13): 

As a sign of the covenant, he is to circumcise himself, all males in his
camp, and all baby boys eight days after their birth.

###### The penalty (17:14):

Those who refuse to be circumcised are to be cut off from the
Israelites.

#### God and Sarai (17:15-19) 

##### The renaming of Sarai (17:15): 

God changes her name from Sarai to Sarah (\"princess\").

##### The reassuring of Sarah (17:16-19): 

God promises that this barren woman will indeed become the mother of
nations.

#### God and Ishmael (17:20-27) 

##### Revealing the future of Ishmael (17:20-22):

God tells Abraham that Ishmael will become the ancestor of twelve
princes and a great nation.

##### Removing the flesh of Ishmael (17:23-27): 

At age ninety-nine, Abraham circumcises himself, the thirteen-year-old
Ishmael, and all the men in his camp.

### THE COMPASSION OF ABRAHAM (18:1-19:38) 

#### The tremendous news (18:1-15) 

##### The reception by Abraham (18:1-8) 

###### Meeting with his heavenly visitors (18:1-3): 

The Lord himself and two angels visit Abraham near Hebron.

###### Ministering to his heavenly visitors (18:4-8):

Abraham prepares a meal of veal, cheese curds, milk, and bread for his
visitors.

##### The reaction of Sarah (18:9-15) 

###### The details (18:9-10):

In her tent Sarah overhears the Lord\'s promise concerning the birth of
Isaac.

###### The doubts (18:11-12): Sarah laughs in unbelief. 

###### The declaration (18:13-14): 

\"Is anything too hard for the LORD? \... Sarah will have a son.\"

###### The denial (18:15): 

In fear, Sarah denies that she laughed in unbelief.

#### The tragic news (18:16-19:38) 

##### The indictment against Sodom (18:16-22) 

###### Abraham\'s faithfulness (18:16-19): 

God determines to tell Abraham about his plan for the city of Sodom,
since Abraham has been chosen to be the father of a righteous people.

###### Sodom\'s filthiness (18:20-22): 

The Lord tells Abraham about the wickedness of Sodom.

##### The intercession for Sodom (18:23-33) 

###### Pleading for fifty (18:23-26): 

Abraham asks if the Lord will spare the city for the sake of fifty
righteous people found there. The Lord answers yes.

###### Pleading for forty-five (18:27-28): 

For forty-five? Yes.

###### Pleading for forty (18:29): 

For forty? Yes.

###### Pleading for thirty (18:30): 

For thirty? Yes.

###### Pleading for twenty (18:31): 

For twenty? Yes.

###### Pleading for ten (18:32-33): 

For ten? Yes.

##### The incineration of Sodom (19:1-38) 

###### Predestruction events (19:1-14) 

####### Lot and the angels (19:1-3): 

Two angels visit Lot, and he invites them to spend the night in his
home.

####### Lot and the Sodomites (19:4-11): 

The men of Sodom demand that Lot hand over the two angels so that they
can sexually molest them.

####### Lot and his family (19:12-14): 

In vain Lot warns his daughters\' fianc√©s to flee the city.

###### Destruction events (19:15-29) 

####### The firmness (19:15-17): 

Reluctant to leave, Lot and his family are led out of the doomed city by
the angels.

####### The fear (19:18-22):

Lot begs that they be allowed to live in Zoar, a small village near
Sodom.

####### The fury (19:23-25): 

The fiery wrath of God falls upon Sodom and other wicked cities of the
plain.

####### The fatality (19:26): 

Looking back to the burning Sodom, Lot\'s wife becomes a pillar of salt.

####### The firestorm (19:27-29): 

From a distance of over twenty miles Abraham sees smoke rising from the
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.

###### Post-destruction events (19:30-38) 

####### The supposition of two sisters (19:30-31): 

Lot\'s daughters fear they will never marry and raise children.

####### The sins of two sisters (19:32-36): 

They get their father drunk and sleep with him in order to become
pregnant.

####### The sons of two sisters (19:37-38): 

Moab, father of the Moabites, is born to Lot\'s older daughter, and
Ben-ammi, father of the Ammonites, to Lot\'s younger daughter.

### THE CARNALITY OF ABRAHAM (SECOND OCCASION) (20:1-18) 

#### Abraham and Abimelech: round one\-\--deceiving (20:1-8) 

##### The deception (20:1-2):

Again, fearing for his life, Abraham introduces Sarah as his sister.

##### The dream (20:3-8) 

###### God informs Abimelech (20:3-6):

In a dream God warns Abimelech that Sarah is married.

###### God instructs Abimelech (20:7-8): 

God tells Abimelech to return Sarah to Abraham and promises that the
patriarch will then pray for him.

#### Abraham and Abimelech: round two\-\--defending (20:9-13) 

##### The painful question (asked of Abraham) (20:9-10): 

\"Why have you done this to us?\"

##### The pitiful answer (given by Abraham) (20:11-13):

Abraham says he feared that Abimelech would have killed him to marry
Sarah.

#### Abraham and Abimelech: round three\-\--delivering (20:14-18):

Abimelech returns Sarah and compensates Abraham for his trouble. Abraham
prays for Abimelech, and God lifts the curse he has placed upon
Abimelech\'s household.

### THE CELEBRATION OF ABRAHAM (21:1-21; 25:12-18) 

#### The fulfillment (21:1-7) 

##### The nature of the fulfillment (21:1-2): 

Sarah gives birth to the heir of the covenant!

##### The name for the fulfillment (21:3-7): 

He is named Isaac, meaning \"laughter,\" because everyone who hears of
this will laugh.

#### The feast (21:8): 

The purpose is to celebrate Isaac\'s weaning.

#### The flouting (21:9): 

Sarah sees Ishmael mocking Isaac.

#### The fury (21:10-11): 

Sarah demands that Abraham order Hagar and Ishmael to leave the camp.

#### The farewell (21:12-14): 

After Abraham is reassured by God that Hagar will be provided for, he
sends her away with a supply of food and water.

#### The fear (21:15-16):

In the wilderness Hagar fears both of them will soon die of exposure.

#### The faithfulness (21:17-21; 25:12-18) 

##### The deliverance and development of Ishmael (21:17-21): 

God provides food and water for Ishmael in the wilderness and later
guides him into adulthood.

##### The descendants of Ishmael (25:12-18): 

Just as God had foretold, Ishmael fathers twelve sons.

### THE CONTRACT BY ABRAHAM (21:22-34) 

#### The persons (21:22): 

Abimelech and his commander, Phicol, come to make a treaty with Abraham.

#### The plan (21:23-24): 

Neither Abimelech nor Abraham will harm each other.

#### The problem (21:25-26): 

Abraham complains that Abimelech\'s servants have taken away one of his
wells. Abimelech says he knew nothing about it.

#### The pact (21:27-30): 

A special peaceful covenant between the two men is ratified as Abraham
gives Abimelech some sheep and oxen.

#### The place (21:31-34): 

This is done at Beersheba (\"well of the oath\").

### THE COMMAND TO ABRAHAM (22:1-24) 

#### Abraham\'s sorrow (22:1-8) 

##### The order (22:1-2): 

God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac as a burnt offering.

##### The obedience (22:3): 

Along with Isaac and two servants, Abraham heads out for the land of
Moriah.

##### The ordeal (22:4-8) 

###### Isaac\'s question (22:7): 

\"Father? \... Where is the lamb for the sacrifice?\"

###### Abraham\'s answer (22:8): 

\"God will provide a lamb, my son.\"

#### Isaac\'s submission (22:9-10): 

He allows Abraham to bind him on the altar.

##### God\'s substitute (22:11-24) 

###### The nature of Abraham\'s offering (22:11-13): 

He is commanded to offer up a nearby ram instead of Isaac.

###### The name of Abraham\'s God (22:14): 

Abraham calls that place \"Yahweh Yir\'eh\" (\"The LORD Will Provide\").

###### The number of Abraham\'s descendants (22:15-19): 

The angel of the Lord again promises Abraham that his descendants will
be as numerous as the stars of the sky and the sand on the seashore.

###### The news concerning Abraham\'s family (22:20-24):

Abraham learns that his brother Nahor has had eight sons. One of them is
Bethuel, who will become the father of Rebekah (Isaac\'s wife).

### THE CAVE OF ABRAHAM (23:1-20) 

#### Abraham\'s tears (23:1-2): 

He weeps for Sarah, who died at age 127.

#### Abraham\'s testimony (23:3-13): 

He describes himself as a stranger and sojourner in Canaan and asks
Ephron the Hittite if he may buy the cave of Machpelah that he might
bury Sarah in it.

#### Abraham\'s transaction (23:14-20) 

##### The price (23:14-16): 

four hundred shekels of silver

##### The place (23:17-20): 

the cave of Machpelah, located in Hebron

### THE COMMISSION BY ABRAHAM (24:1-67) 

#### The plan (24:1-4): 

Abraham instructs his servant (probably Eliezer) to find a wife for
Isaac from Abraham\'s native land of Mesopotamia.

#### The problem (24:5-6): 

Even if Eliezer cannot find a willing bride there, he is not to take
Isaac there to live.

#### The promises (24:7-9) 

##### God\'s promise to Abraham (24:7-8): 

Abraham remembers the Lord\'s promise concerning the land of Canaan.

##### The servant\'s promise to Abraham (24:9): 

He will do exactly as Abraham has instructed. D. The preparation
(24:10): The servant loads ten camels with gifts and departs.

#### The prayer (24:11-21) 

##### The request (24:11-14): 

The servant asks the Lord to cause the woman chosen as Isaac\'s bride to
volunteer to provide water for him and his camels.

##### The results (24:15-21): 

Even as the servant is praying, Rebekah appears upon the scene and
fulfills the sign.

#### The presents (24:22-33) 

##### Rebekah and the servant (24:22-28): 

The servant gives Rebekah some gold jewelry.

##### Laban and the servant (24:29-33): 

Rebekah\'s brother invites the servant into his home.

#### The proposal (24:34-58) 

##### The overview by the servant (24:34-48) 

###### The servant\'s conversation with Abraham (24:34-41): 

The servant recounts to Laban the mission Abraham has given to him.

###### The servant\'s conversation with God (24:42-44): 

The servant recounts how God has answered his prayer.

###### The servant\'s conversation with Rebekah (24:45-48): 

The servant recounts his initial meeting with Rebekah.

##### The offer by the servant (24:49-56): 

He gives Rebekah more costly jewelry and clothing and invites her to
accompany him back to Canaan to marry Isaac.

#### The persuasion (24:57-60): 

\"Are you willing to go with this man?\" And \[Rebekah\] replied, \"Yes,
I will go.\"

#### The pilgrimage (24:61): 

Abraham\'s servant and Rebekah and her servants leave Mesopotamia for
Canaan.

#### The presentation (24:62-67):

Isaac is walking through a field when he meets his new bride. They marry
and provide each other with love and comfort.

### THE CLOSING YEARS OF ABRAHAM (25:1-11) 

#### Abraham\'s family (25:1-4) 

##### Abraham\'s last spouse (25:1): 

Abraham marries his third wife, Keturah.

##### Abraham\'s last sons (25:2-4): 

Keturah bears him six sons, including Midian.

#### Abraham\'s fortune (25:5-6): 

He passes on his wealth to his sons, giving the greatest part to Isaac.

#### Abraham\'s farewell (25:7-11): 

He dies at the age of 175.

Isaac - GENESIS 25:19-28:9; 36:1-43 
-----------------------------------

This section covers the life of Isaac.

### ISAAC AND REBEKAH (25:19-26:16) 

#### Isaac\'s devotion to Rebekah (25:20-34) 

##### The request (25:19-22): 

He prays that Rebekah will conceive a child.

##### The results (25:23-34): 

God answers Isaac\'s prayer in double measure!

###### The birth of the twins (25:24-26): 

Esau is born first, followed quickly by Jacob.

###### The birthright and the twins (25:27-34): 

Upon reaching manhood, Esau sells his birthright for a bowl of stew.

#### Isaac\'s deception concerning Rebekah (26:1-16) 

##### God\'s direction (26:1-5): 

During a famine, God forbids Isaac from going to Egypt, but allows him
to enter Philistia.

##### Isaac\'s deceit (26:6-7): 

As his father had previously done, Isaac lies to Abimelech (the
Philistine king) about his wife, claiming she is his sister.

##### Abimelech\'s detection (26:8-16): 

Upon seeing Isaac caressing Rebekah, Abimelech rebukes Isaac for
deceiving him. In spite of this, God continues to bless Isaac.

### ISAAC AND THE PEOPLE OF GERAR (26:17-22): 

An argument erupts concerning the ownership of some wells.

### ISAAC AND GOD (26:23-25): 

In a dream, the Lord appears to Isaac and confirms the covenant he made
with Isaac\'s father, Abraham.

### ISAAC AND THREE PHILISTINE LEADERS (26:26-33): 

Realizing God\'s blessing upon Isaac, the Philistines propose a peace
treaty with him. Isaac accepts and celebrates with a great feast.

### ISAAC AND HIS SONS (26:34-28:9; 36:1-43) 

#### The pain (26:34-35): 

Esau marries two Hittite women, who make life miserable for Isaac and
Rebekah.

#### The preparations (27:1-4): 

Believing that death is near, Isaac instructs Esau to hunt some wild
game and prepare a meal for him. Isaac promises to bless Esau following
this meal.

#### The plot (27:5-29) 

##### Conceived by Rebekah (27:5-17): 

Overhearing this conversation, Rebekah prepares a similar meal,
disguises Jacob to resemble Esau, and sends him in to Isaac.

##### Carried out by Jacob (27:18-29) 

###### The reluctance of Isaac (27:18-23): 

At first Isaac is confused, saying, \"The voice is Jacob\'s, but the
hands are Esau\'s.\"

###### The reassurance by Jacob (27:24-29): 

Jacob convinces Isaac that he is indeed Esau and receives his father\'s
blessing.

#### The perplexity (27:30-33):

As Jacob exits, Esau enters, ready to be blessed.

#### The plea (27:34-38): 

Weeping in sheer anger and frustration, Esau says: \"O my father, bless
me, too!\"

#### The prophecy (27:39-40):

Isaac predicts that Esau and his descendants will live by the sword and
serve his brother for a time.

#### The prejudice (27:41):

Esau vows to kill Jacob following the death of their father.

#### The parting (27:42-28:5) 

##### Rebekah\'s words to Jacob (27:42-46):

She urges him to escape Esau\'s wrath by going to her hometown of Haran
in Mesopotamia.

##### Isaac\'s words to Jacob (28:1-5):

Isaac tells Jacob to go to Haran and choose a bride from his mother\'s
relatives.

#### The perception (of Esau) (28:6-9): 

Realizing that his Canaanite wives are a source of grief to his parents,
Esau marries Mahalath, daughter of Ishmael (Abraham\'s son through
Hagar).

#### The people (of Esau) (36:1-43): 

This chapter is a list of Esau\'s descendants.

Jacob - GENESIS 28:10-35, 37-38 
-------------------------------

This section covers the life of Jacob.

### THE TRAVELER (28:10-22) 

#### Jacob\'s vision (28:10-15) 

##### He sees the angels of God (28:10-12): 

During a dream at Bethel, Jacob sees angels ascending and descending
upon a stairway reaching from earth to heaven.

##### He sees the God of the angels (28:13-15): 

The Lord is standing at the top of the stairway and reaffirms to Jacob
the covenant he established with Abraham.

#### Jacob\'s vow (28:16-22): 

Upon waking, Jacob promises to serve God, but only if God protects him
and provides for him.

### THE LOVER (29:1-30) 

#### Jacob\'s love for Rachel (29:1-17) 

##### First meeting with Rachel (29:1-12): 

Jacob meets Rachel by a well and rolls away a huge stone from its
entrance so she can water her father\'s sheep. Her father is Laban,
Jacob\'s uncle.

##### First meeting with Laban (29:13-17):

Jacob and Laban meet each other and decide that Jacob should work for
Laban.

#### Jacob\'s labor for Rachel (29:18-30) 

##### The diligence of Jacob (29:18-21):

Jacob asks to marry Rachel in exchange for seven years of work for
Laban.

##### The deception of Laban (29:22-30): 

On the eve of the wedding, Laban secretly substitutes Leah for Rachel,
forcing Jacob to work yet another seven years.

### THE FAMILY MAN (29:28-30:24; 35:16-18, 23-26) 

#### Jacob\'s four wives (29:28-30; 30:1-4, 9) 

##### Leah (29:28): 

Jacob\'s first wife

##### Rachel (29:30): 

Jacob\'s second wife

##### Bilhah (29:29; 30:1-4): 

Rachel\'s servant

##### Zilpah (30:9): 

Leah\'s servant

#### Jacob\'s twelve sons (29:31-30:24; 35:16-18, 23-26) 

##### Reuben (29:31-32): 

Leah\'s first son

##### Simeon (29:33): Leah\'s second son 

##### Levi (29:34): 

Leah\'s third son

##### Judah (29:35): Leah\'s fourth son 

##### Dan (30:5-6): 

Bilhah\'s first son

##### Naphtali (30:7-8): 

Bilhah\'s second son

##### Gad (30:9-11): 

Zilpah\'s first son

##### Asher (30:12-13): 

Zilpah\'s second son

##### Issachar (30:14-18): 

Leah\'s fifth son

##### Zebulun (30:19-20): 

Leah\'s sixth son

##### Joseph (30:22-24): 

Rachel\'s first son

##### Benjamin (35:16-18): 

Rachel\'s second son

#### Jacob\'s one daughter, Dinah (through Leah) (30:21) 

### THE EMPLOYEE (30:25-31:55) 

#### The specification (30:25-43): 

Jacob agrees to continue working for Laban under certain conditions.

##### The request (30:25-34):

Jacob asks that he be allowed to keep all the speckled and spotted
animals from the flock.

##### The results (30:35-43): 

Jacob becomes a very wealthy man!

#### The separation (31:1-55): 

Jacob finally decides to leave Laban.

##### The reasons for the separation (31:1-3, 13-16) 

###### Laban\'s resentment (31:1-2):

Laban\'s sons turn his heart against his son-in-law, whom they envy.

###### God\'s revelation (31:3, 13): 

The Lord tells Jacob, \"Return to the land of your father and
grandfather.\" So Jacob returns to Bethel.

###### Rachel and Leah\'s reassurance (31:14-16): 

Jacob\'s wives encourage him to follow what God tells him to do.

##### The review prompting the separation (31:4-13):

Jacob feels Laban has deceived him, changing his wages on ten occasions
(see 31:7, 41).

##### The reunion following the separation (31:17-55) 

###### Frustration! (31:17-23): 

Laban learns that Jacob and his entire camp have left without informing
him and evidently have stolen the family idols.

###### Revelation! (31:24-25): 

During his ride to overtake Jacob, Laban is warned by God not to harm
him.

###### Confrontation! (31:26-30): 

Laban asks, \"Why did you slip away secretly? \... Why have you stolen
my household gods?\"

###### Explanation! (31:31-42):

Jacob replies that Laban\'s dishonesty caused him to leave. He says that
he left secretly because of fear, but insists that he did not steal
Laban\'s gods.

###### Representation! (31:43-55): 

Both men agree to an uneasy truce, building a pile of stones to serve as
a visible reminder.

### THE WRESTLER (32:1-33:16) 

#### Jacob\'s communion with God (32:1-32) 

##### The presence (32:1-2): 

As Jacob and his family continue on their way, angels come and meet
them.

##### The plan (32:3-5): 

Upon learning that Esau is nearby, a frightened Jacob sends messengers
to his brother, promising him great riches.

##### The panic (32:6-8): 

The messengers return with some terrifying news Esau is coming with four
hundred men to meet Jacob.

##### The prayer (32:9-12): 

Jacob \"reminds\" God of the covenant he established with Abraham and
cries out for help.

##### The payment (32:13-21): 

He attempts to bribe Esau by sending him great herds and flocks of
goats, rams, camels, cattle, and donkeys.

##### The power struggle (32:22-32) 

###### The travail (32:22-26): 

As Jacob is waiting alone by the Jabbok River during the night, a man
comes and wrestles with him until dawn.

###### The triumph (32:27-29): 

Jacob maintains the upper hand, and God changes his name from Jacob
(meaning, \"the deceiver\") to Israel (\"one who struggles with God\").

###### The testimony (32:30-32): 

Jacob calls the place Peniel, meaning \"face of God.\" Following this
event, he will (literally) never walk the same again! B. Jacob\'s
reunion with Esau (33:1-16)

#### Jacob presents himself to Esau (33:1-4): 

Jacob bows seven times as he approaches Esau. To Jacob\'s immense
relief, Esau embraces and kisses him! Soon both are weeping for joy.

#### Jacob presents his family to Esau (33:5-7) 

#### Jacob presents his flocks to Esau (33:8-16) 

### THE OBEDIENT PATRIARCH (33:17-20; 35:1-7, 9-15) 

#### The returns (as ordered by God) (33:17-20; 35:1) 

##### To Shechem (33:17-20): 

Here Jacob buys a field and builds an altar, calling it EI-Elohe-Israel,
meaning \"God, the God of Israel.\"

##### To Bethel (35:1): 

At God\'s command, Jacob returns to Bethel, where he first saw the dream
of the stairway to heaven.

#### The revival (35:2-7): 

Jacob collects and buries all the idols in his camp, ordering each
person to \"wash yourselves, and put on clean clothing.\" Following
this, Jacob builds an altar and calls it Elbethel, meaning \"the God of
the house of God.\"

#### The revelation (35:9-15): 

God again confirms to Jacob the covenant he established with Abraham.

### THE BROKEN-HEARTED (34:1-31; 35:8, 16-29; 37:1-36; 38:1-30) 

#### The funerals (35:8, 16-20, 27-29) 

##### The death of Deborah (35:8): 

She had been Rebekah\'s former nurse.

##### The death of Rachel (35:16-20): 

Rachel dies while giving birth to Benjamin and is buried along the way
to Bethlehem.

##### The death of Isaac (35:27-29): 

Both Jacob and Esau return to Hebron and bury their 180year-old father.

#### The failures (the sins of Jacob\'s children) (34:1-31; 35:21-26; 37:1-36; 38:1-30) 

##### Murder, on the part of Simeon and Levi (34:1-31): 

After Dinah is raped by Shechem, a local Canaanite prince, several
events take place.

###### The suggestion (34:3-12): 

Hamor, father of Shechem, meets with Jacob, proposing close
relationships between both peoples, beginning with the marriage between
Dinah and Shechem.

###### The subtlety (34:13-24): 

Pretending to agree with this suggestion (but inwardly abhoring it), the
brothers insist that Hamor and his men must first be circumcised.

###### The slaughter (34:25-29): 

On the third day, when the men of the town are helpless because of their
wounds from circumcision, Simeon and Levi walk into their camp and
slaughter them!

###### The scandal (34:30-31): 

Jacob rebukes his sons for causing his name to \"stink\" among the other
Canaanites in the land, fearing that some might seek revenge.

##### Adultery, on the part of Reuben (35:21-22): 

Reuben sleeps with Bilhah, Jacob\'s concubine and Rachel\'s former
servant.

##### Sexual immorality and hypocrisy, on the part of Judah (38:1-30) 

###### Judah\'s Canaanite wife (38:1-5): 

Judah fathers three sons by her: Er, Onan, and Shelah.

###### Judah\'s choice (38:6-10): 

Judah chooses a woman named Tamar to be Er\'s wife. But Er dies before
fathering any children, leaving Onan to raise up a family for him
through Tamar. But Onan also dies without fathering any children.

###### Judah\'s contract (38:11-13): 

Judah promises Tamar that Shelah, his youngest son, will someday take
her as his wife.

###### Judah\'s carnality (38:14-23): 

Later, realizing this promise has not been kept, Tamar disguises herself
as a prostitute and entices Judah to sleep with her.

###### Judah\'s condemnation (of Tamar) (38:24-25): 

Three months later, Judah learns of Tamar\'s pregnancy and orders her to
be burned. Tamar, however, quickly produces irrefutable evidence that
the father of her unborn child is none other than Judah himself!

###### Judah\'s confession (38:26-30): 

A red-faced Judah acknowledges, \"She is more in the right than I am.\"

##### Deceit and treachery, on the part of Jacob\'s ten sons (37:1-36): 

These brothers, jealous of their father\'s special affection for Joseph,
sell their younger brother into Egyptian slavery.

Joseph - GENESIS 37, 39-50 
--------------------------

This section covers the life of Joseph.

### JOSEPH, THE FAVORED SON (37:1-35) 

#### Loved by his father (37:3) 

#### Loathed by his brothers (37:1-35) 

##### The reasons for their hatred (37:1-11) 

###### The devotion he enjoys (37:1-4): 

\"Now Jacob loved Joseph more than any of his other children because
Joseph had been born to him in his old age. So one day he gave Joseph a
special gift-a beautiful robe.\"

###### The dreams he experiences (37:5-11): 

Joseph has two dreams that symbolically portray his brothers bowing down
before him.

##### The results of their hatred (37:12-35) 

###### The trip (37:12-17): 

Jacob sends Joseph to check on the ten brothers. Joseph catches up with
them at Dothan.

###### The treachery (37:18-27): 

The brothers, still angry over Joseph\'s dreams and favored status with
their father, plan to kill Joseph. But Reuben convinces them to throw
him alive into a pit.

###### The transaction (37:28-30): 

The brothers decide to sell Joseph to a band of Ishmaelite traders for
twenty pieces of silver.

###### The trickery (37:31-35): 

The brothers deceive Jacob into believing that Joseph has been killed
and eaten by a wild animal.

### JOSEPH, THE FAITHFUL STEWARD (37:36; 39:1-20) 

#### Joseph\'s service (37:36; 39:1-6): 

Joseph becomes a faithful and highly effective servant in the house of
Potiphar, captain of Pharaoh\'s palace guard.

#### Joseph\'s self-control (39:7-20) 

##### The request (39:7): 

Potiphar\'s wife attempts to seduce Joseph.

##### The refusal (39:8-12):

He refuses her advances repeatedly, even running from the house on one
occasion, leaving his shirt behind.

##### The revenge (39:13-20): 

Joseph is falsely accused of attempted rape and thrown into prison!

### JOSEPH, THE FORGOTTEN SLAVE (39:21-40:23) 

#### Joseph and the jailer (39:21-23): 

Joseph gains favor with the jailer, who places him in charge of the
entire prison!

#### Joseph and the prisoners (40:1-23) 

##### The characters (40:1-4): 

Pharaoh\'s chief cup-bearer and chief baker anger him, and he throws
them into prison. Joseph is assigned to take care of them.

##### The confusion (40:5-8): 

Both the cup-bearer and the baker have dreams that they cannot
understand.

##### The clarification (40:9-19): 

Joseph interprets both dreams.

###### The cup-bearer\'s dream (40:9-15): 

Pharaoh will release and restore him in three days.

###### The baker\'s dream (40:16-19): 

He will be executed in three days!

##### The conclusion (40:20-23): 

Both prophecies come true at the end of three days. The cupbearer,
however, promptly forgets Joseph.

### JOSEPH, THE FAMED STATESMAN (41:1-57) 

#### The dreams of Pharaoh (41:1-36) 

##### The revelation (41:1-8): 

Pharaoh has two dreams.

###### First dream (41:1-4): 

He sees seven thin cows devouring seven fat cows.

###### Second dream (41:5-8): 

He sees seven thin heads of grain devouring seven healthy ones.

##### The remembrance (41:9-13): 

After no one is able to interpret Pharaoh\'s dreams, the cupbearer
suddenly remembers that Joseph was able to interpret his dream.

##### The review (41:14-24):

Joseph is brought from prison to hear the king relate his two mysterious
dreams.

##### The rendering (41:25-32): 

God reveals to Joseph that Pharaoh\'s dreams are foretelling the events
of the next fourteen years. The first seven years will witness abundant
crops, while the next seven will see only famine.

##### The recommendation (41:33-36):

Joseph suggests that someone be appointed to store up food supplies
during the good years to prepare for the bad ones.

#### The decrees of Pharaoh (41:37-57) 

##### Joseph\'s promotion (41:37-46): 

Pharaoh appoints Joseph to oversee the storage of grain, placing him in
charge of the entire government in Egypt.

##### Joseph\'s program (41:47-57): 

Joseph stores massive amounts of grain in nearby cities. So when the
famine comes, \"people from surrounding lands also \[come\] to Egypt to
buy grain from Joseph.\"

### JOSEPH, THE FORGIVING SAINT (42:1-48:22) 

#### Joseph and his brothers (42:1-45:28) 

##### The unknown brother (42:1-44:34) 

###### First trip of Jacob\'s sons to Egypt (42:1-38) 

####### The reason (42:1-6): 

Jacob tells his ten oldest sons, \"I have heard there is grain in Egypt.
Go down and buy some for us before we all starve to death.\"

####### The recognition (42:7-8):

Joseph recognizes his brothers, but they do not recognize him.

####### The rebuke (42:9-14): 

Attempting to make them squirm, Joseph accuses his brothers of being
spies, which they deny.

####### The requirement (42:15-20):

Joseph demands that his brothers return home and bring back Benjamin,
the youngest brother. Simeon is kept as a guarantee that they will
return.

####### The remorse (42:21-23): 

The guilt-stricken brothers conclude that God is punishing them for
selling Joseph into slavery.

####### The restraint (42:24): 

Upon hearing this, Joseph leaves the room so that he does not reveal his
true identity as he weeps.

####### The return (42:25-28): 

The nine brothers arrive in Canaan with their food. As they unpack, they
are astounded to discover in their bags the money they had used to buy
the food!

####### The review (42:29-38): 

Jacob\'s sons tell him all about their first trip, including how \"the
man\" (Joseph) has requested that Benjamin accompany them on their
return journey. Jacob refuses.

###### Second trip of Jacob\'s sons to Egypt (43:1-44:34) 

####### The promise (43:1-14): 

After Judah guarantees Benjamin\'s safety, a reluctant Jacob finally
agrees to let Benjamin go.

####### The preparation (43:15-17): 

Upon arriving, Joseph sends the brothers to his home, where food is
being prepared for them.

####### The panic (43:18-25): 

The manager of Joseph\'s household reassures the frightened brothers
that his master means them no harm. Simeon is now released and joins
them. (4) The presentation (43:26-30): Joseph enters and is
\"introduced\" to Benjamin.

####### The placing (43:31-34): 

To his brothers\' amazement, Joseph seats them at the banquet table in
the order of their ages.

####### The plot (44:1-17): 

Joseph orders that his own silver cup be secretly placed in Benjamin\'s
sack. Shortly after leaving the city, the brothers are stopped and
searched. To the brothers\' horror, the cup is found in Benjamin\'s
sack, and he is arrested.

####### The plea (44:18-34): 

Judah begs Joseph to release Benjamin, offering to be imprisoned in his
place.

###### The unveiled brother (45:1-28) 

####### The climax (45:1-4): 

Unable to hold back any longer, a tearful Joseph reveals his true
identity to his astonished brothers!

####### The consolation (45:5-8): 

Joseph tells his brothers that God has allowed everything to happen as
it did so that he might save people from starvation during the famine.

####### The counsel (45:9-15): 

Joseph tells his brothers to go home and tell their father to pack up
and move to Egypt.

####### The command (45:16-24): 

Pharaoh says the same to the brothers.

####### The confirmation (45:25-28): 

Upon seeing the wealth brought back by his sons, Jacob believes their
report about Joseph.

#### Joseph and his father (46:1-47:31) 

##### Jacob\'s trip to Egypt (46:1-27) 

###### The promise of God (46:1-7): 

God directs Jacob to move to Egypt, promising to care for him there.

###### The people of God (46:8-27): 

Jacob and his entire family, seventy in all, move to Egypt.

##### Jacob\'s time in Egypt (46:28-47:31) 

###### The meetings (46:28-47:10) 

####### Between Jacob and Joseph (46:28-30): 

Father and son meet and embrace in Goshen.

####### Between Jacob and Pharaoh (46:31-47:10):

Pharaoh gives the best of the land to Jacob and his family.

###### The ministry (47:11-31):

Joseph carefully attends to the needs of his father, Jacob.

####### The provision (47:11-12):

Joseph personally sees to it that his family has all the food they need.

####### The promise (47:27-31): 

Joseph promises his father, Jacob, that he will bury him beside his
ancestors in the Promised Land, not in Egypt.

##### Joseph and the Egyptians (47:13-26): 

The continuing famine eventually forces all the Egyptians (except for
the priests) to sell their land to Pharaoh for food. Joseph then
redistributes the land and establishes a law requiring one-fifth of all
crops to be given to Pharaoh.

##### Joseph and his sons (48:1-22) 

###### Jacob adopts Joseph\'s sons (48:1-7): 

Manasseh and Ephraim now enjoy the same status as Jacob\'s other twelve
sons.

###### Jacob anoints Joseph\'s sons (48:8-22): 

Ignoring Joseph\'s initial objections, Jacob bestows the greater
blessing on Ephraim, the younger son, instead of on Manasseh, the
firstborn.

### JOSEPH, THE FRUITFUL TREE (49:1-50:26) 

#### The blessing of Jacob (49:1-27):

Each of the Jacob\'s sons receives a blessing from him.

##### Reuben (49:3-4): 

He is as unruly as the stormy sea and is demoted because of his
immorality.

##### Simeon and Levi (49:5-7): 

They are violent men given to anger and cruelty, so their descendants
will be scattered throughout Israel.

##### Judah (49:8-12): 

He will be praised by his brothers and will defeat his enemies. The
scepter (royal line) will not depart from him \"until the coming of the
one to whom it belongs.\"

##### Zebulun (49:13): 

He will Iive by the seashore and become a harbor for ships.

##### Issachar (49:14-15): 

He will work with animals and till the land.

##### Dan (49:16-18): 

He will be like a snake beside the road.

##### Gad (49:19): 

He will defend himself against all enemies.

##### Asher (49:20): 

He will produce rich food fit for kings.

##### Naphtali (49:21): 

He will be as free as a deer.

##### Joseph (49:22-26): 

He will be like a fruitful tree beside a fountain, blessing others. He
has been persecuted, but he has been strengthened by God. He will be
blessed by God and will be a prince among his brothers.

##### Benjamin (49:27): 

He will devour his enemies like a hungry wolf.

#### The body of Jacob (49:28-50:26) 

##### The request (49:28-33): 

Again Jacob requests to be buried with his ancestors in the cave of
Machpelah at Hebron. Then he dies.

##### The return (50:1-14):

Following a 70-day period of mourning, the twelve brothers carry their
father\'s embalmed body to Hebron.

##### The reassurance (50:15-21): 

After the brothers return to Egypt, Joseph tries to calm their fears
that he will seek revenge. He tells them, \"God turned into good what
you meant for evil.\"

##### The remaining years (50:22-26):

Joseph lives to see the third generation of Ephraim\'s children and dies
at age 110.
